# The matrimony of qualitative and quantitative analytics (and why it’s important for your mobile app)

_Captured: 2016-10-21 at 07:43 from [medium.com](https://medium.com/@Appseecom/the-matrimony-of-qualitative-and-quantitative-analytics-and-why-its-important-for-your-mobile-app-397fbf9eb9d6#.mpvktgmgm)_

# The matrimony of qualitative and quantitative analytics (and why it’s important for your mobile app)

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*ipw9ra_8r5qCUJBSMkQopA.jpeg)

As mobile app technology evolves, it seems logical that our mobile analytics
capabilities should evolve proportionally. Yet for the most part, any
evolution in the mobile analytics realm is happening at a much more glacial
pace. Now that’s not to discount improvements in areas such as data
visualisation, product integrations, and real-time capabilities, which have
helped product managers gather and dissect their data better than ever before.
These advancements are valuable, but do not supersede the underlying
disproportion between mobile app technology and our capability to analyse
mobile app usage that exists today.

Interestingly, this disparity is due to the data itself — you’ve all heard the
quote “the devil is in the data”. But what if I was to tell you that the
quantitative data you have been gathering is actually functioning more like a
prologue to an important story than the story itself — in this case, your
users’ story. This quantitative data gives you a powerful introduction into
what users are doing in your mobile app, but it doesn’t allow you to explore
their specific experiences. Mobile product managers need data that provides
them with the ability to actually see and understand specific user behaviour
instead of having to define it by aggregate, numerical data.

However, a few mobile analytics companies, including Appsee, have recognised
this need and brought a new type of analytics to market –_qualitative
analytics_.

And as you probably guessed, once you combine qualitative analytics with your
quantitative data, you are able to obtain that epic, complete story on your
mobile users. But how exactly?

### The shortcomings of quantitative analytics

In order to understand the potency of this union, we first need to understand
why relying solely on analytics that provides quantitative data (traditional
analytics) simply does not cut it.

Let’s just review the definition of _quantitative _for a moment. Merriam
Webster notes the definition as follows:

_1: of, relating to, or expressible in terms of quantity_

_2: of, relating to, or involving the measurement of quantity or amount_

_3: based on quantity; specifically of classical verse: based on temporal
quantity or duration of sounds_

Numbers, numbers, numbers — that is the core of the definition. So when it
comes to quantitative analytics, basically all of the data and information it
collects can be measured with numbers.

This is no bad thing, in fact it’s extremely important. Quantitative data can
help you gather insights on overall user actions and usage trends, such as the
length of the average user session or how many users completed a certain
conversion funnel. But these numbers don’t answer the pivotal question of
“why?”. Quantitative analytics can only answer your number based inquiries.
Numbers have an extremely important story to tell, but how do you figure out
and communicate that story?

Enter qualitative analytics.

### What is qualitative analytics and why is it needed?

While quantitative analytics focuses on aspects of your app that can be
measured by numbers, _qualitative_ analytics zones in on the one essential
element of your mobile app that cannot be delineated by numbers. That element
is the **user experience**; your user’s unique story within your app.

At the moment, how do you know whether your users are frustrated with a
certain unresponsive button or confused by a particular feature? To put it
simply, no number on a dashboard can effectively describe those specific in-
app experiences. In order to fully understand and assess your users’ stories,
you need data that enables you to _see_ what your users are experiencing and
how they behave. This is the essence of qualitative analytics.

With features such as [user session
recordings](https://www.appsee.com/features/user-recordings) and[ touch
heatmaps](https://www.appsee.com/features/touch-heatmaps), qualitative
analytics allows you to actually step into the shoes of your real users (not
beta testers) and examine how they truly interact with your app. This is the
best way to analyse a KPI as subjective and nuanced as user experience.

Yet the value of qualitative analytics is not limited to inspecting user
experience. It also serves as an extremely powerful compliment to your
quantitative data.

### How quantitative and qualitative make the perfect couple

Quantitative analytics allows you to identify on a numerical basis important
trends, issues, and actions within your mobile app. Then, qualitative
analytics (such as unique user session recordings) augments this data by
supplying the crucial “whys” behind those numbers.

Let’s look at some compelling use cases of this power couple in action.

### In-app crashes

Your quantitative analytics tells you that your daily app crash rate has
increased by 50%. This is very important, but now you need to understand why
this is happening. To obtain valuable visual context behind your crashes, you
turn to your qualitative analytics and watch session recordings of crashed
sessions from that specific day. This allows you to accurately reproduce a
crash and discern the sequence of user actions that led to a crash.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*2_vmhepHPnL_dDSe.png)

### Conversion funnels

You have an ecommerce app with a conversion funnel in place for purchase
completion. Your quantitative data tells you that over a seven-day period,
74.4% of your users that visited the “My Cart” screen, dropped out of the
funnel and did not trigger the event “Purchase Complete”. These stats alert
you to the fact that your users might be encountering a potential issue or
multiple issues within the “My Cart” screen. What are the issues exactly? By
drilling down to specific session recordings of users that dropped out of the
funnel, you can see exactly what might have caused friction within their
experience.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*Bd3WheGfVYDMLYqf.png)

In a nutshell, this combination of quantitative data and qualitative
information allows you to streamline the process of turning data into
information, and information into insights — actionable insights. No more
scenarios of drowning in copious amounts of quantitative data and guesswork.

To top it off, by using qualitative analytics to distill quantitative data,
you can save valuable time and resources — which product managers often are
low on. At the end of the day, this quantitative and qualitative union should
empower you to separate the “wheat from the chaff” within your data and make
key decisions regarding your product with more confidence. We can’t wait to
hear what insights you obtain.
