# Keeping It Simple Doesn't Mean You're Stupid

_Captured: 2016-12-24 at 01:18 from [flip.it
http://flip.it/c1XwFw](http://flip.it/c1XwFw
http://flip.it/c1XwFw)_

Know your worth and your value, and be firm and clear on what that is.


![](//2.gravatar.com/avatar/b2f744df296b2323beb582c6c0864fe7?s=400&d=mm&r=g)

__[Most Read](/most-popular/)

{{contrib_block.display_advoice_brand}} {{contrib_block.display_voice_type}}

{{contrib_block.display_author.name}}Voice Amy Rees Anderson ,  

{{contrib_block.display_author.type}} __ __ Contributor
{{contrib_block.display_author.type}}

__ Contributor

Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.

  * Full Bio
  * Recent Posts
  * Popular Posts

Full profile ->'">

The author is a Forbes contributor. The opinions expressed are those of the
writer.

Loading ...

Loading ...

This story appears in the {{article.article.magazine.pretty_date}} issue of
{{article.article.magazine.pubName}}. Subscribe

“Genius is the ability to reduce the complicated to the simple.” C. W. Ceran

I consider myself to be a somewhat intelligent person, but when someone
explains a new concept to me in terms that are overly complex and unfamiliar,
I struggle to easily grasp it. To learn a new concept, I need things described
in a way that I can relate them to something I am already familiar with. For
example, when I was a young CEO starting a software company, I needed to learn
about computer hardware so I could speak intelligently on the subject. I asked
my IT employees to teach me, and they proceeded to explain to me that
computers were made up of a hard drive that stored gigabytes of data, Random
Access Memory (RAM), a Central Processing Unit (CPU) and so on. They may as
well have been speaking Chinese to me at that point, because although I could
hear the words they were saying, I couldn't relate them to anything that was
familiar to me.  I left the room feeling discouraged and frustrated.

Desperate to understand computer hardware, I turned to my younger brother who
was revered as a genius on computers. I expressed to him how lost I felt at
the technical words being thrown out at me, and I begged him to find a way to
dumb it down into terms I could understand.  What he described to me next was
nothing short of amazing. He told me to pretend that the local library was the
computer box itself. He explained that in the library were racks of shelves
holding books and each of these racks was representative of gigabytes of hard
drive storage. The more gigabytes of space, the more racks of books your
computer shelves could hold. He explained that the table in the library where
I sat to read my book was like the computer’s RAM. The size of the table, or
the amount of RAM, determined the number of open books I could have open on my
table to view at one time. He shared that the computer’s CPU was like my brain
in the library directing my body to do tasks, such as getting a book off the
shelf, opening the book, reading the book, etc. The more cores the CPU had the
more tasks (known as threads) I could perform simultaneously. He went on to
describe the rest of the computer’s hardware in this same fashion.

Everything he said made perfect sense. He had taken a very complicated subject
and made it into the simplest. His ability to simplify the subject didn’t make
him less intelligent; it made him a genius!

That experience taught me that the best proof of someone’s intelligence is
their ability to simplify the complex. During my years as a CEO I observed
that people who are confident in their knowledge wouldn’t hesitate to share it
with others in terms that are easily understood. Whereas, people who attempt
to talk over people’s heads through the use of overly complex terms and
descriptions were typically those who lack a true understanding of the subject
themselves and are trying to mask that fact.

"If you can't explain it to a six year old, you don't understand it yourself."
– Albert Einstein

Too often, people over-complicate things in business in an attempt to display
their intelligence, when in reality they end up pushing people away and
ultimately losing credibility. They come off as an elitist, rather than a team
player. Truly intelligent people are not afraid to share their knowledge
because they don’t view other people gaining knowledge as a threat to their
own. Rather, they take pleasure in sharing and teaching others. As a result
they become builders of people, and they contribute tremendously to a
company’s overall success.

One of the most common areas where complicating things will kill a company is
sales. Keeping the sales pitch simple and directly focused on how it will
impact the customer’s life for the better is the best way to make a sale.
Sales people in general tend to spend too much time focusing the conversation
on themselves, their product, or their company rather than focusing on how
their product or service will directly benefit the customer. The moment they
get too technical and complex is the moment they start to lose the sale. A
perfect example of how to simplify a sale is the way  sells its iPods. Rather
than focusing on the number of gigabytes the iPod has, Apple focuses their
sales pitch on the number of songs the iPod will hold because that is a
personal benefit that is simple for every potential customer to understand.

We have all heard the phrase, “Keep it simple, stupid.” The truth is that
keeping it simple requires confidence and humility. We can all benefit if we
can recognize that we don’t have to talk like a super genius to be seen as
intelligent. There is tremendous genius in our ability to keep it simple.
Don’t ever forget that many of the world’s most difficult problems have been
solved with the simplest solutions.


