# The Interface of a Cheeseburger

_Captured: 2016-10-23 at 12:25 from [ia.net](https://ia.net/know-how/the-interface-of-a-cheeseburger)_

Note 29 October 2006

All things have an interface. Shaping interfaces is shaping the character of
things. The brand is what transports the character of things. When looking at
McDonald’s, iPod, or Nintendo DS it becomes quite obvious that the interface
_is_ the brand.

A 16 column horizontal submenu, I think, standing at the counter at
McDonald’s. I scroll left and right and put a simple cheeseburger in my mental
shopping basket. 16 columns, yet so usable. “_Cheezubaagaa kudasai_” I hear
myself say, and glancing at the cashier display and the French fry machine
interface, I hold my breath: Wow. Why did I never realize? Being a foreigner
in Japan, I come here because at McDonald’s I don’t need to deal with
language. I could get much better food in a similar price range if I were
ready to think, read Kanji and explain myself. But I’m not, as I’m hungry.

## I’ll Fill You Without Any Brain Stress

McDonald’s is very easy to use, I then think, and the McDonald’s interface
looks the same all over the world. Yes, that is why it is so successful. A
simple interface. I don’t need to think when entering, ordering, paying,
eating at McDonald’s. McDonald’s [doesn’t make me think](http://www.amazon.com
/gp/redirect.html?ie=UTF8&location=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.amazon.com%2FDont-Make-
Think-Approach-Usability%2Fdp%2F0321344758&tag=informationar-20&linkCode=ur2&c
amp=1789&creative=9325). That’s what the McDonald’s brand promises the hungry
stomach: We’re sweet and we’ll fill you without any brain stress.

Sandwiches can be complicated. While checking out (paying), I decide to go
through with this thought, and look closely at the cheeseburger, and yes,
indeed. The cheeseburger has the easiest food interface one could think of. No
forks, no knives, no spoons, no plates, no chopsticks. Like a sandwich, but
softer and sweeter and above all: Standardized. No alarms and no surprises
when eating a cheeseburger. Almost as simple as [“the only intuitive
interface”](http://www.greenend.org.uk/rjk/2002/08/nipple.html)—the nipple.
Sandwiches can be complicated.

Standardization makes the cheeseburger’s interface a branded one. Only a
McDonald’s cheeseburger looks like a McDonald’s cheeseburger. I unwrap it and
look at the bread and the meat and the ketchup mustard color pattern:
McDonald’s cheeseburger it is.

![A McDonald’s cheeseburger](https://ia.net/content/4-know-how/20061029-the-
interface-of-a-cheeseburger/cheeseburger.jpg)

And while I chew, and the sugars start tickling my synapses, I think that I
should print this cheeseburger on the back of my business card with a punchy
new claim. I walk home and start typing this article on my cell phone, going
over that claim and reducing it to two words and a symbol, now, standing in
front of my house door, I nod, looking at my nifty new claim:

## Interface=Brand

In the meantime, sitting at my laptop going over that little article, I think:
Maybe it _is_ just a _déformation professionnelle_, as I deal with interfaces,
usability issues and branding all day long. I just can’t help seeing things
that way. But then again, if you _can_ see the interface as the brand, the
brand being the interface: You might understand the success of modern branding
concepts.

The superficialists might say that brands create identity through consistency,
which creates trust. Sounds logical, but brands are not logical, they’re
emotional. If you see a brand as an interface it allows you to explore the
notion of brand experience being user experience. People don’t analyze
usability, they enjoy it or suffer through it. Good usability means not
needing to think in order to act.

![iPods](https://ia.net/content/4-know-how/20061029-the-interface-
of-a-cheeseburger/iPods.jpg)

The iPod was successful because it’s pretty easy to use. But then: Where is
the iPod logo? On the back! The interface makes the brand. The owner
identifies their iPod through its typical interface (click wheel plus screen),
others identify the iPod through the white earbuds.

![Zune](https://ia.net/content/4-know-how/20061029-the-interface-
of-a-cheeseburger/zune_oficial.jpg)

And that’s one more reason why the Zune is basically a copy. [No matter how
many features it
counts](http://www.acm.org/ubiquity/views/v7i07_pfeiffer.html), the Zune
doesn’t have its own interface. Not from a 1st _or_ 3rd person perspective. It
looks like a ornamented iPod with random ear plugs. Copies can’t
[“kill”](http://www.wired.com/news/columns/0,71896-0.html?tw=rss.index) the
original if the original is so protoypical.

Simpler doesn’t necessarily mean less. Look at the Nintendo DS and its two
screens. When I first saw it I was irritated—we’re back to Donkey Kong
multiscreen? What’s going on?

![Nintendo Donkey Kong multiscreen](https://ia.net/content/4-know-how/20061029
-the-interface-of-a-cheeseburger/dkpocketsizeback.jpg)

Not quite. It’s a different, particular, simple, and extremely usable concept.
Play in the upper screen, deal with the options in the lower screen. The DS
beats the Playstation Portable in terms of interface. And don’t even get me
started on the Wii against Playstation3 when talking about interfaces…

![Nintendo DS in pink](https://ia.net/content/4-know-how/20061029-the-
interface-of-a-cheeseburger/ds_pink.jpg)

The list goes on and on: Look at the Dyson vacuum cleaner against the rest of
the world. Apart from being a great performer, it has a unique, very usable
interface. Starbucks against suck ups. It’s a perfect WYSIWYG (what you see is
what you get). Lego against the wannabes. [Coca-Cola](/know-how/ugly-ugly-
coca-cola-makes-nice) against Pepsi (compare the bottles).

Compare [Google
Search](https://encrypted.google.com/search?hl=en&q=information+architects)
against its twin [Yahoo
Search](https://search.yahoo.com/search?p=information+architects). Who wins?
The original. Strong online brands, such as Flickr, Craigslist, Ebay, Youtube
developed a unique, simple recognizable interface. And they’re hard to beat as
their face is not a surface, it is interactive, it is an interface, it is the
product itself. Copying it won’t work.

![Unscalable Amazon information architecture](https://ia.net/content/4-know-
how/20061029-the-interface-of-a-cheeseburger/unscalable_ia.png)

You can establish yourself with a bad interface, if you’re early and lucky or
if you have the market power to force people to use your product. See Myspace,
Amazon, MSN, Windows, QuarkXPress. Once you get to be market leader with a
typically complicated interface, you actually have a good shot at keeping your
users, as they’re so traumatized they wouldn’t want to go through another
painful learning process. Nowadays you have a better chance to become
successful if you go for simplicity and usability. And you have a good chance
to develop a strong brand by just doing that.

Usually strong usability, simplicity and a clear focus automatically lead to a
strong identity. Here’s a shocker: Internationally acclaimed usability guru
Jakob Nielsen’s totally [anti-graphic website](http://www.nngroup.com/articles
/why-no-graphics/) with all its geeky flaws and absolute usability approach
had a strong identity. Neglecting all notions of good taste, it looked
extremely typical. And that is branding. [Branding is not pretty, it’s strong
](/know-how/ugly-ugly-coca-cola-makes-nice). Take
[Craigslist](http://www.craigslist.org) for example. Their standard link
colors are not pretty, but they’re strong through functionality.
[Facebook](http://www.facebook.com) is maybe an example of a very usable
website that might go for a more audacious interface/brand identity.

In the mean time, I should print a Lego brick on the backside of my business
card. Or glue one to it. With the claim “Interfaces make brands”. Or maybe I
should print that cheeseburger on the back and a little red box on top that
says: Interface=Brand. While we’re at it, you might as well teach this non-
native speaker which one works well as a claim:

  * Brand = Interface
  * Interface = Brand
  * Interface Creates Brand Experience
  * Interface Defines Brand Experience
  * Interfaces Make Brands
  * UI=Brand
  * Interface=Identity

## Brand Equals Interface Not Surface

That branding doesn’t equal [creating a logo](/know-how/logo-bullshit-co-inc)
is an simple truth that brand consultants have been fighting for a long time.
Yet it’s never been so clear: Brand equals interface, not surface. Recently
products are getting progressively easier to use. And if you ask an
information designer, this is happening because most consumers are Internet
users. The web teaches us consumers to consider usability when buying a
product, it teaches the R&D department how successful a good interface is, it
teaches Finance how profitable usability is, and it teaches the Marketing
department that mere exposure is just a charlatanry that won’t sell products
anymore.

And the lesson I learned at McDonald’s? You can have a bad, ugly product and
still be extremely successful. As long as you have lots of sugar and a strong,
easy-to-use interface defining your brand identity.

