# Top 10 Evil Ways to Use Technology

_Captured: 2016-10-29 at 12:39 from [lifehacker.com](http://lifehacker.com/top-10-evil-ways-to-use-technology-1739793718?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+lifehacker%2Ffull+%28Lifehacker%29)_

  *   * [lifehacker](//lifehacker.com)
  * [Deadspin](//deadspin.com)
  * [Gizmodo](//gizmodo.com)
  * [Jalopnik](//jalopnik.com)
  * [Jezebel](//jezebel.com)
  * [Kotaku](//kotaku.com)
  * [Lifehacker](//lifehacker.com)

  * [index](/tag/index)
  * [Skillet](//skillet.lifehacker.com)
  * [Two Cents](//twocents.lifehacker.com)
  * [Vitals](//vitals.lifehacker.com)
  * [App directory](/tag/appdirectory)
  * [Gear](//gear.lifehacker.com)

# [Top 10 Evil Ways to Use Technology](http://lifehacker.com/top-10-evil-ways-
to-use-technology-1739793718)

![](https://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--
oULJjnWa--/c_fill,fl_progressive,g_center,h_80,q_80,w_80/1835tmb38zquojpg.jpg)

[Melanie Pinola](//kinja.com/melaniepinola)

[Yesterday 5:00pm](http://lifehacker.com/top-10-evil-ways-to-use-
technology-1739793718)

[Filed to: weekend roundup](//lifehacker.com/tag/weekend-roundup)

  * [evil week](//lifehacker.com/tag/evil-week)
  * [lifehacker top 10](//lifehacker.com/tag/lifehacker-top-10)
  * [technology](//lifehacker.com/tag/technology)
  * [security](//lifehacker.com/tag/security)
  * [privacy](//lifehacker.com/tag/privacy)
  * [wi-fi](//lifehacker.com/tag/wi-fi)
  * [hacking](//lifehacker.com/tag/hacking)

[17](http://lifehacker.com/top-10-evil-ways-to-use-
technology-1739793718#replies)34

  * Edit
  * Promote
  * DismissUndismiss
  * Hide
  * Share to Kinja
  * Toggle Conversation tools
  * [Go to permalink](http://lifehacker.com/top-10-evil-ways-to-use-technology-1739793718)

![](https://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--
HSx1cGlV--/c_scale,fl_progressive,q_80,w_800/1498356558763191699.jpg)

Like other powerful tools, technology can be used for great good or for great
evil. Learn how people use technology for wrongdoing so you can protect
yourself—or use their tricks to actually do good. Here are the top 10 “evil”
ways you can use technology.

_This post is part of our [Evil Week](http://lifehacker.com/welcome-to-
lifehackers-seventh-annual-evil-week-1788085206) series at Lifehacker, where
we look at the dark side of getting things done. Sometimes evil is justified,
and other times, knowing evil means knowing how to beat it. Want more? Check
out our [evil week tag page](http://lifehacker.com/tag/evil-
week#_ga=1.105669515.968941705.1436971740)._

[

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==
)

](http://lifehacker.com/welcome-to-lifehackers-seventh-annual-evil-
week-1788085206)

######  [ Welcome to Lifehacker's Seventh Annual Evil Week__
](http://lifehacker.com/welcome-to-lifehackers-seventh-annual-evil-
week-1788085206) [ Welcome to Lifehacker's Seventh Annual Evil Week__
](http://lifehacker.com/welcome-to-lifehackers-seventh-annual-evil-
week-1788085206) [ Welcome to Lifehacker's Seventh Annual Evil Week__
](http://lifehacker.com/welcome-to-lifehackers-seventh-annual-evil-
week-1788085206)

It’s that time of year again: As Halloween approaches, it’s time to unleash
our dark side. Welcome… [ Read more Read more ](http://lifehacker.com/welcome-
to-lifehackers-seventh-annual-evil-week-1788085206)

### 10\. Spoof Caller ID

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==
)

Pranksters and scammers use [caller ID spoofing](http://lifehacker.com/5853056
/how-to-spoof-caller-id) to take advantage of us—in [common telephone
scams](http://lifehacker.com/how-to-identify-and-avoid-the-most-common-
telephone-sca-1692068970), for example, where “Microsoft” calls to warn you
your computer has a virus and they’ll help you fix it (for a fee). There are
legitimate reasons why you might want to make your phone number show up
differently on caller ID (e.g., place a call to a young kid as Santa or
Cinderella), and there are lots of spoofing apps and services to help you do
this.

### 9\. Uncover Blurred Information in Photos

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==
)

People blur out the information in photos to make sure sensitive information
isn’t readable to others, but it turns out [this strategy isn’t that
secure](http://lifehacker.com/how-to-uncover-blurred-information-in-
photographs-1648562658)—particularly when you’re trying to hide numbers. The
takeaway: Don’t use simple mosaics to blur your image.

### 8\. Create a USB Password Stealer

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==
)

It’s bad enough that major password leaks happen so often, hackers can steal
our passwords [with just a USB flash drive and a single
script](http://lifehacker.com/create-a-usb-password-stealer-to-see-how-secure-
your-i-1650354166), grabbing our cache of passwords stored in our browser and
elsewhere. You might want to test your vulnerability to this trick yourself,
but either way, to protect yourself, remember the security basics: always have
physical control over your computer, [use a secure password
manager](http://lifehacker.com/lifehacker-faceoff-the-best-password-managers-
compare-1682443320) (here’s [how they compare, security-
wise](http://lifehacker.com/5944969/which-password-manager-is-the-most-
secure)), [and turn on two-factor
authentication](http://lifehacker.com/5932700/please-turn-on-two-factor-
authentication).

### 7\. Get into a Private BitTorrent Tracker or Usenet Indexer

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==
)

[Private trackers](http://lifehacker.com/5897095/whats-a-private-bittorrent-
tracker-and-why-should-i-use-one) and usenet indexers are great communities,
but they take dedication and they’re hard to get into. While some of our
[strategies for getting into one](http://lifehacker.com/how-to-get-into-a
-private-bittorrent-tracker-or-usenet-1738086061) aren’t necessarily “evil,”
you’ll be working your way into exclusive private file sharing communities.

### 6\. Spoof an Email Address

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==
)

Caller ID isn’t the only thing spammers spoof. If you’ve ever gotten a
strange, spammy email from a friend—or, worse, [your email account just
spammed all of your contacts](http://lifehacker.com/5875848/how-can-i-find-
out-why-my-email-account-just-spammed-my-friends-and-family)—you know how
annoying spoofed emails can be. Here’s [how data thieves spoof email
addresses](http://lifehacker.com/how-spammers-spoof-your-email-address-and-
how-to-prote-1579478914) to phish for information or con us into sending money
to Nigerian princes. If you think you’ve been impersonated, you’ll need to
[take some advanced steps to secure your account](http://lifehacker.com/when-
gmails-filters-arent-enough-how-to-tackle-spam-513920584).

### 5\. Snoop on Someone’s Phone or Computer Without Them Knowing

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==
)

Is your company monitoring you? [Possibly](http://lifehacker.com/5894689/how-
can-i-tell-if-im-being-monitored-at-work-and-what-can-i-do-about-it). The NSA?
[Your ISP](http://lifehacker.com/5923017/how-can-i-prevent-my-isp-from-
tracking-my-every-move)? Yeah. But it’s pretty easy too for a friend or family
member to dig into your phone or computer without you knowing—whether by
gaining physical access to your phone or computer or [using remote monitoring
tools](http://lifehacker.com/three-ways-to-remotely-monitor-someone-elses-
computer-1739406855). Parents might snoop on their kids, significant others
might snoop on their partners out of insecurity or suspicion, whatever the
reason, [covering those snooping tracks isn’t that hard](http://lifehacker.com
/how-to-cover-your-tracks-when-snooping-on-someones-phon-1648657016). If you
think you might be the one being snooped on, look for signs any of those
stealthy steps weren’t followed. If you share a computer with someone else,
[learn how you can still protect your privacy with this
guide](http://lifehacker.com/5806791/how-to-protect-your-privacy-when-you-
share-your-computer).

### 4\. Crack a Wi-Fi Password

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==
)

WEP passwords are too [easy to crack with tools like
BackTrack](http://lifehacker.com/5305094/how-to-crack-a-wi-fi-networks-wep-
password-with-backtrack) making it super simple to get into a WEP-”protected”
router. That’s why everyone recommends using WPA—or really, [WPA2, the latest
encryption standard](http://lifehacker.com/the-difference-between-wi-fi-
security-protocols-wpa2-a-1672256222). [WPA can be cracked
too](http://lifehacker.com/5873407/how-to-crack-a-wi-fi-networks-wpa-password-
with-reaver), though! That is, if your router has WPS turned on. So disable
WPS if you can or try open-source router firmware like [DD-WRT](http://dd-
wrt.com/), which doesn’t support WPS.

### 3\. Hack a Wi-Fi Network

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==
)

Why would someone want to steal your router’s password? Besides [stealing your
Wi-Fi bandwidth](http://lifehacker.com/5738123/how-can-i-find-out-if-someones-
using-my-wireless-network), to spy on everything going on over your network,
of course. It’s amazing [the DIY creations hackers can
use](http://lifehacker.com/six-great-diy-projects-for-hacking-computers-and-
networ-1649618886) to [sniff out network packets](http://lifehacker.com/how-
to-tap-your-network-and-see-everything-that-happens-1649292940). Fake routers
and networks, [created with the help of Kali Linux](http://lifehacker.com/how-
to-hack-your-own-network-and-beef-up-its-security-w-1649785071), for example,
can be used to trick machines into connecting, and then eavesdrop on network
communications. (Yes, there’s a lot of spoofing going on in this article!)
This is a good time to remind you to [check your router’s
settings](http://lifehacker.com/5553789/what-settings-should-i-change-on-my-
wi-fi-router)—especially [these top security settings](http://lifehacker.com
/the-most-important-security-settings-to-change-on-your-1573958554).

### 2\. Sniff Out Passwords and Cookies

This is somewhat related to hacking a Wi-Fi network, but it’s more about the
dangers of using public Wi-Fi. It’s [really
easy](http://lifehacker.com/5853483/a-guide-to-sniffing-out-passwords-and-
cookies-and-how-to-protect-yourself-against-it) for hackers to steal your
logins and snoop on your browsing session, when the network is not secure or
you’re connecting to sites that don’t use HTTPS. To protect yourself, your
best bet is to [use a VPN](http://lifehacker.com/5940565/why-you-should-start-
using-a-vpn-and-how-to-choose-the-best-one-for-your-needs) whenever you’re
using public Wi-Fi or follow some of [these other safety
precautions](http://lifehacker.com/5576927/how-to-stay-safe-on-public-wi-fi-
networks).

### 1\. Break into a Computer

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==
)

Finally, you might shudder to know it’s pretty easy to break into a computer,
whether it’s [a Windows PC](http://lifehacker.com/5674972/how-to-break-into-a
-windows-pc-and-prevent-it-from-happening-to-you) or [a
Mac](http://lifehacker.com/5681710/how-to-break-into-a-mac-and-prevent-it-
from-happening-to-you)—even if your computer is password protected. If your
computer is encrypted, however, such as with [BitLocker](http://go.redirecting
at.com/?id=33330X911647&site=lifehacker.com&xs=1&isjs=1&url=http%2525253A%2525
252F%2525252Fwindows.microsoft.com%2525252Fen-us%2525252Fwindows7%2525252Fprod
ucts%2525252Ffeatures%2525252Fbitlocker&xguid=1f40799e659290890c4dd142fdf2124c
&xuuid=f64e4ed3d46d2a85dd978c941c8e3fb1&xsessid=d773af6a809cfd29a58c9aabbecece
d5&xcreo=0&xed=0&sref=http%2525253A%2525252F%2525252Flifehacker.com%2525252F56
74972%2525252Fhow-to-break-into-a-windows-pc-and-prevent-it-from-happening-to-
you&pref=http%2525253A%2525252F%2525252Flifehacker.com%2525252Fhow-to-break-
into-a-computer-and-prevent-it-from-happe-5854079&xtz=240) (for Windows) or
FileVault (on Mac), you’ll be protected from some of the more common methods
hackers use to steal data from a computer. You’ll also want to make sure you
have [a very strong, unique password](http://lifehacker.com/5937303/your-
clever-password-tricks-arent-protecting-you-from-todays-hackers) for your
computer login. If you get locked out of your computer, however, and forgot
your password, well, now you know how to get back in.

Advertisement

Advertisement

_Illustration by [Nick Criscuolo](http://nickquest.com/)._

**[Melanie Pinola**](https://kinja.com/melaniepinola)[melanieuy@gmail.com](mailto:melanieuy@gmail.com)[@melaniepinola](https://twitter.com/melaniepinola)

Contributing Writer

#### Gear from Kinja Deals

* * *

![](https://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--UoryMM8B--/c_fill,fl_
progressive,g_north,h_264,q_80,w_470/rkgjzwcmme3ks0kkefns.jpg)

##### [Stellavie Is The Most Beautiful Way To Get The Night Sky Onto Your
Walls

](http://gear.lifehacker.com/stellavie-is-the-most-beautiful-way-to-get-the-
night-sk-1772075806)

![](https://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--NsXzmLus--/c_fill,fl_
progressive,g_north,h_264,q_80,w_470/lft8lcurdcoscogfbfes.jpg)

##### [Love Your Dyson Even More With Tools That Let It Get Under Your
Furniture

](http://gear.lifehacker.com/love-your-dyson-even-more-with-tools-to-let-it-
get-unde-1786325398)

![](https://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--4uJqkSZB--/c_fill,fl_
progressive,g_north,h_264,q_80,w_470/sjtsjywuj2wir2e35e8j.jpg)

##### [Now You Can Upgrade Your Candelabra Bulbs to LED For $2 Each

](http://deals.kinja.com/now-you-can-upgrade-your-candelabra-bulbs-to-led-
for-2-1788344515)

Reply17 replies

Leave a reply

## **You** may also like

**[Lifehacker**

#### This DIY Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP) Generator Is Simple to Build, Fries
Small Electronics

Thursday 12:30pm

](http://lifehacker.com/this-diy-electromagnetic-pulse-emp-generator-is-
simpl-1788086529)

**[Lifehacker**

#### ​Create a USB Password Stealer to See How Secure Your Info Really Is

10/24/14 10:00am

](http://lifehacker.com/create-a-usb-password-stealer-to-see-how-secure-
your-i-1650354166)

**[Skillet**

#### This Fast Food Joint Gives You the Most Fries With Your Order

Yesterday 11:30am

](http://skillet.lifehacker.com/this-fast-food-joint-gives-you-the-most-fries-
with-your-1788306932)

## **Recent** from [Melanie Pinola](//kinja.com/melaniepinola)

  * [19
  * 82
  * 285.3K
![Top 10 Ways to Hack Your Grill](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BA
EKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

**Lifehacker** * Melanie Pinola

#### Top 10 Ways to Hack Your Grill

5/27/16 8:00am

](http://lifehacker.com/top-10-ways-to-hack-your-grill-1607315381)

  * [3
  * 13
  * 18.6K
![Cook Puff Pastry in Your Waffle Iron for a Croissant-Like Treat](data:image/
gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

**Lifehacker** * Melanie Pinola

#### Cook Puff Pastry in Your Waffle Iron for a Croissant-Like Treat

5/14/16 12:00pm

](http://lifehacker.com/cook-puff-pastry-in-your-waffle-iron-for-a-croissant-
li-1776594708)

  * [9
  * 52
  * 30.9K
![Treat Your Uninformed Critics Like You Would a Toddler](data:image/gif;base6
4,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

**Lifehacker** * Melanie Pinola

#### Treat Your Uninformed Critics Like You Would a Toddler

5/14/16 11:00am

](http://lifehacker.com/treat-your-uninformed-critics-like-you-
would-a-toddler-1776592230)

[Share](https://facebook.com/sharer.php?u=POST_URL)[Tweet](https://twitter.com
/share?text=POST_TITLE&url=POST_URL)

* * *

* * *

  * [About Blog](/about)
  * [Need Help?](http://help.gawker.com/)
  * [Content Guide](http://legal.kinja.com/content-guidelines-90185358)
  * Lifehacker Store

### Redirecting to the Lifehacker store in

Disclaimer: You are leaving a Gizmodo Media Group, LLC website and going to a
third party site, which is subject to its own privacy policy and terms of use.

Continue

  * [Permissions](http://advertising.gawker.com/about/index.php#contact)
  * [Privacy](http://legal.kinja.com/privacy-policy-1750920278)
  * [Terms of Use](http://legal.kinja.com/kinja-terms-of-use-90161644)
  * [Advertising](http://advertising.gawker.com/)
  * [Jobs](http://gizmodo.com/careers)
  * [RSS](http://feeds.gawker.com/lifehacker/full)
  * (C)2016 Gizmodo Media Group

![](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6770184&cv=2.0&cj=1)

Kinja is in read-only mode. We are working to restore service.

![](//pubads.g.doubleclick.net/activity;dc_iu=/4246/DFP_Audience_Pixel;dc_seg=
22540930;blog=lifehacker;ord=1?)


