# U.S. has secretly expanded its global network of drone bases to North Africa

_Captured: 2016-10-28 at 00:01 from [www.washingtonpost.com](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/us-has-secretly-expanded-its-global-network-of-drone-bases-to-north-africa/2016/10/26/ff19633c-9b7d-11e6-9980-50913d68eacb_story.html)_

![](https://img.washingtonpost.com/rf/image_480w/2010-2019/WashingtonPost/2016/02/23/Editorial-Opinion/Images/Was8952820-1237.jpg?uuid=nUK_Ztp-EeWSXx0QBizILQ)

A U.S.-made Reaper drone, part of Operation Barkhane's aerial detachment,
flies over a Nigerian military airport in Niamey in January 2015. (Dominique
Faget/AFP/Getty Images)

By [Adam Entous](http://www.washingtonpost.com/people/adam-entous) and [Missy
Ryan](http://www.washingtonpost.com/people/missy-ryan) October 26 at 1:09 PM
[Follow @missy_ryan](https://twitter.com/@missy_ryan)

The Pentagon has secretly expanded its global network of drone bases­ to North
Africa, deploying unmanned aircraft and U.S. military personnel to a facility
in Tunisia to conduct spy missions in neighboring Libya.

The Air Force Reaper drones began flying out of the Tunisian base in late June
and have played a key role in an extended U.S. air offensive against an
Islamic State stronghold in neighboring Libya.

The Obama administration pressed for access to the Tunisian base as part of a
security strategy for the broader Middle East that calls for placing drones
and small Special Operations teams at a number of facilities within striking
distance of militants who could pose a threat to the West.

U.S. officials, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss an operation
that has not been acknowledged, said the drones being flown out of Tunisia
were unarmed and were principally being used to collect intelligence on
Islamic State targets in Sirte, Libya, where the United States has conducted
more than 300 airstrikes since August.

U.S. officials said they sought access to the air base in Tunisia to close a
critical “blind spot” for U.S. and Western intelligence services­ in North
Africa, which has become the Islamic State’s largest base of operations
outside of Syria and Iraq. The region is also home to al-Qaeda-linked
fighters.

![](https://img.washingtonpost.com/rf/image_480w/2010-2019/WashingtonPost/2016
/10/26/Foreign/Graphics/USTUNISIA-drones-
isis-v4.jpg?uuid=6LZ4Tpu2Eea1UrH4XkhAhg)  

Obama administration officials say they have tried to shore up Tunisia’s
fledgling democracy and position the country as a key counter­terrorism
partner in the region. Although the drones operating out of Tunisia conduct
only surveillance missions, U.S. officials said they could be armed in the
future if Tunisia gives the United States permission. The Tunisian Embassy in
Washington declined to comment.

The U.S. military has other drone bases­ on the African continent, from Niger
to Djibouti. But officials said they were too far from populous areas on the
Libyan coast to be useful in day-to-day counter­terrorism operations there.
The longer drones have to travel to reach their destinations, the less time
they have to “loiter” over their targets.

For lethal strikes in Libya, the U.S. military has relied on manned U.S.
aircraft based in Europe and armed drones flown out of Naval Air Station
Sigonella on the Italian island of Sicily.

Sigonella is relatively close to Sirte, but flights from the base are
routinely canceled because of cloud cover over the Mediterranean and other
weather-related issues, officials said.

U.S. logistical concerns about using Sigonella and other bases­ in Europe for
operations in North Africa prompted the Pentagon’s push for a facility on
Tunisian soil.

_[[How U.S. Special Operations troops secretly help foreign forces target
terrorists](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/outside-
the-wire-how-us-special-operations-troops-secretly-help-foreign-forces-target-
terrorists/2016/04/16/a9c1a7d0-0327-11e6-b823-707c79ce3504_story.html)]_

The Obama administration has kept its negotiations over access to the base
secret for more than a year because of concerns that Tunisia’s young
democracy, worried about being closely associated with an outside military
power, would pull out of the talks, or that militants would step up attacks in
the North African country.

The Islamic State has already claimed a number of attacks in Tunisia over the
past two years, including the killing of dozens of foreign tourists at a beach
resort in 2015.

Defense officials said the Pentagon has deployed about 70 military personnel
to Tunisia to oversee drone operations there.

Tunisia was the Obama administration’s first choice of countries in North
Africa to host U.S. drones because of its proximity to Libya and Washington’s
interest in rapidly expanding security ties with the government.

But U.S. officials said the negotiations came at a particularly delicate time.
Five years after their uprising against dictator Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali,
Tunisians have grown increasingly frustrated with many of their post-
revolution leaders. In the summer, disaffection over the economy and security
boiled over, leading to the premier’s ouster.

Tunisian officials negotiating the drone deal were particularly concerned
about a public backlash over cooperation with a foreign power and wanted to
avoid the appearance that they were a party to U.S. military operations in a
neighboring country.

At the same time, Tunisian officials were eager to secure additional U.S.
support for their counter­terrorism fight at home. Tunisian officials were
especially worried that an eventual assault on Islamic State hideouts in Libya
could send militants streaming across the border into Tunisia.

The United States was already conducting manned surveillance flights over
Tunisia, providing the country’s security forces­ with intelligence about
extremist threats. That program helped smooth the way in Tunis for
Washington’s request to base drones there.

_[[Why it’s taking so long for the U.S. and its allies to finish off the
Islamic State in
Libya](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/checkpoint/wp/2016/10/24/why-its-
taking-so-long-for-the-u-s-and-its-allies-to-finish-off-the-islamic-state-in-
libya/)]_

U.S. military officials in Washington and Stuttgart, Germany, where Africa
Command is based, grew increasingly eager to strike a deal with Tunisia this
past spring. Opening a drone base there would help clear the way for the long-
awaited Sirte operation, they said.

A brazen attack in March[ on a town near the Libyan
border](http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/03/cloneoftunisia-ben-gardane-
clashes-1603070709142-160307151549524.html) provided proof for some Tunisian
officials of why more U.S. help might be required.

Under the memorandum of understanding giving the Pentagon access to the base,
the Americans committed to helping build up Tunisia’s intelligence-collection
capabilities.

While Tunisia is racing to grow its own aerial surveillance program, with
U.S.-manufactured ScanEagles and other light manned surveillance aircraft, the
country remains reliant on the United States and other allies for intelligence
about militants.

As part of the new arrangements, the Obama administration agreed to share
intelligence from the Reapers with Tunisian security forces­ to help them
improve border security. But so far, the United States has made drone flights
inside Libya the priority and officials said that is unlikely to change at
least until the campaign in Sirte winds down. The battle in Sirte has already
lasted far longer than U.S. officials had expected, as effective Islamic State
de­fenses and repercussions from Libya’s political crisis slow the advance of
local forces­ backed by U.S. air power.

The United States’ second military intervention in Libya in five years has
underscored the challenge that the Obama administration has faced getting even
close NATO allies such as Italy to open their bases­ to armed U.S. drones.

While U.S. surveillance drones have been based in Sigonella since 2011, the
Italian government refused to give the U.S. military permission to fly armed
drones out of the base until earlier this year, citing concerns about sparking
an anti­war backlash at home.

Desperate to fill the intelligence void over Libya, the United States briefly
had to use drones based in faraway Jordan.

The Obama administration had considered opening backup talks with Egypt about
putting a drone base there to support operations in Libya. But U.S. officials
said those talks were never initiated.

