# Learning Programming Is An Exercise In Discipline, And It's Worth It

_Captured: 2016-10-29 at 21:12 from [www.forbes.com](http://www.forbes.com/sites/quora/2016/10/20/learning-programming-is-an-exercise-in-discipline-and-its-worth-it/#6ddb5b0c3dd2)_

**At the time, one of my closest friends, James, also decided that he wanted to learn guitar.**

His parents got him an acoustic guitar, and he started taking lessons with a
really talented teacher name Laurie. He attended Berklee College of Music, and
he was also a professional touring Jazz Guitarist. He didn’t need to give
guitar lessons. He just did it because he liked teaching.

I jumped right into playing chords, and I could play most of the chords used
in popular songs. Given that most pop songs are made up of the [same four
chords](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oOlDewpCfZQ), I was capable of playing
some cool stuff with basically zero knowledge of music theory and no
understanding of what actually made up a chord.

**Meanwhile, my friend James was learning at the same time and was miles behind my pace.**

He was doing things like reading sheet music, which I thought was pointless.
During this time, he built up a solid foundation in music principles. But it
took him over a month before he started playing the chords I was playing.

**But a short time later, James surpassed me. **And not even by a little bit. He ended up miles ahead of me. When we would talk about music, he would say a bunch of things that I didn’t understand at all. Not only was he capable of playing pop music, but he also could play Jazz, Blues, Folk and more. To make things even more embarrassing for me, James was even composing songs of his own.

**I was still playing the same four-chord songs.**

I asked James about his instructor Laurie, and shortly after found out guitar
lessons with Laurie were more expensive than the lessons from my Guitar Center
instructor. But at this point, it was pretty easy to see why, so I convinced
my parents to let me switch to Laurie.

**I took guitar lessons from Laurie for several months.**

He would teach me fundamentals and ask me to practice them. I would go home
and play my guitar, but I couldn’t break the habit of practicing the same four
chords I learned before. Whenever it came time to practice the new type of
work that Laurie assigned me, the work that actually made a difference, I’d
lose motivation to play and do something else.

**Eventually, I stopped taking guitar lessons.**

I never got further than the skill level that I reached after a few weeks of
lessons. And it wasn’t because I didn’t spend the time playing the guitar.
Because I did. I was motivated enough to keep playing those four chords. But
the motivation was fickle.

When it came to pushing myself to learn the stuff that would unlock my
potential, I lacked the discipline I needed.

Guitar remained a big part of James’ life. He went on to play concerts to live
audiences.** **I haven’t touched a guitar in years.

**Most people have probably had a similar experience.**

Whether playing the guitar, trying a new sport, learning to code, or really
attempting to do anything new. _You’re motivated enough to reach a certain
point in the learning process. But you’re unable to maintain that motivation
and do things the right way, and it becomes really easy to just give up._

So, how do you feel motivated enough to not give up?

The answer is this:

**You don’t.**

_Motivation gets you started. But it takes discipline to stick to your path
and achieve your goals. _Discipline is the mental fortitude of putting in the
work that will help the most in the long term, even if there are things that
you would prefer to do in the short term.

In your path of learning to program, you need need to develop the discipline
to:

  * **Practice consistently.** This is the only way to make consistent progress.
  * **Practice things that are outside your comfort zone.** The best developers volunteer for work that makes them nervous.
  * **Gain a solid foundation in the fundamentals before moving onto the next thing. **Learning things like algorithms, data structures, and how to perform computational transformations is essential to enabling yourself to level up as a programmer. [This will also serve you well in the technical interview process.](http://blog.thefirehoseproject.com/posts/getting-your-first-junior-web-developer-job/?utm_source=quora&utm_campaign=quora_answers&utm_medium=quora_ken_answer)
  * **Become adaptable at your craft. **Technology is evolving quickly, so you need to set up the framework of teaching yourself new concepts on the go.

Learning to program is hard. And it takes time. So in order to do it, you need
to turn that initial boost of motivation into long-lasting discipline.

But now that you know what it takes, you’ve got this.

So what are you waiting for?

_[This question](https://www.quora.com/What-is-the-best-way-to-feel-motivated-
to-keep-learning-programming) originally appeared on

