# The Science Behind Smarter Decision Making: 7 Mental Models You Should Know

_Captured: 2016-10-31 at 18:54 from [rypeapp.com](http://rypeapp.com/blog/mental-models-decision-making/)_

![Rype Academy](http://rype.rype.netdna-cdn.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/2016/06/new-rype-logo-white-60-height.png)

  * About
    * [Learn More](https://rypeapp.com/learn)
    * [Testimonials](https://www.rypeapp.com/reviews)
    * [Affiliate Partners](https://www.rypeapp.com/partners)
    * [Contribute For Us](http://rypeapp.com/blog/contribute-for-us)
    * [Try Rype For Free](https://www.rypeapp.com/plans)
  * [Popular](http://rypeapp.com/blog/popular/)
  * [Language](http://rypeapp.com/blog/language-learning-blog/)
  * [Travel](http://rypeapp.com/blog/travel-blog/)
  * [Rype Journey](http://rypeapp.com/blog/startup-blog/)
  * [Productivity](http://rypeapp.com/blog/productivity-blog/)
  * Free Resources
    * [Learn a Language Challenge](https://www.rypeapp.com/learn-a-language)
    * [Free Class: How to Learn a New Language in 90 Days](https://rypeapp.com/how-to-learn-a-new-language)
    * [Beginner's Guide to Learning Languages Online](https://www.rypeapp.com/how-to-learn-languages-online-lesson-1)
    * [How much do private lessons cost (free tool)](https://www.rypeapp.com/how-much-do-private-language-lessons-cost/)
  * ![](http://rype.rype.netdna-cdn.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/tryitfree-button-1.png)](http://rypeapp.com/blog/modals/)

# The Science Behind Smarter Decision Making: 7 Mental Models You Should Know

  * [Sean Kim](http://thegrowthlist.com)
  * [Learning Faster](http://rypeapp.com/blog/learning-tips/), [Popular Posts](http://rypeapp.com/blog/popular/), [Productivity Blog](http://rypeapp.com/blog/productivity-blog/)

![TheEisenhowerMatrix](http://rype.rype.netdna-cdn.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/TheEisenhowerMatrix-960x550.png)

20.7k

Shares

[Share on
Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Frypeapp.com%2Fblog
%2Fmental-models-decision-making%2F)[Share on Twitter](https://twitter.com/int
ent/tweet?text=The%20Science%20Behind%20Smarter%20Decision%20Making%3A%207%20M
ental%20Models%20You%20Should%20Know&url=http://rypeapp.com/blog/mental-
models-decision-making/&via=rype_app)

> > “It does not take much strength to do things, but it requires a great deal
of strength to decide what to do.”  
― Elbert Hubbard

Every one of us make dozens, if not hundreds of small to big decisions on a
daily basis.

Some don't impact our lives at all, while some can change the outcome of our
entire lives.

Whether it's trying to figure out which job you should take, [deciding to quit
your job to start a business](http://rypeapp.com/blog/traveling-business-
online/), [move to a new city](http://rypeapp.com/blog/traveling-alone-around-
the-world/) -- these decisions are never easy.

Yet there are people who we can learn from who make highly impactful decisions
on a regular basis, and they've developed mental models to help them make
smarter decisions.

We've curated our 7 favorite mental models for you to enjoy.

> # 1\. 10/10/10 Rule  

>

> ## Short term vs Long term

After reaching the top pinnacle of the publishing industry, one of the mental
models that [Suzy Welch](https://twitter.com/suzywelch) adopted to help her
navigate through tough personal and professional times is called the
**[10/10/10 Rule**](https://www.amazon.com/10-10-10-Fast-Powerful-Unstuck-
Family/dp/1416591834).

Most of us have been guilty of making decisions without thinking about the
long term consequences, and the 10/10/10/ rule can used to reflect on the
long-term by asking yourself:

  * _How will we feel about it 10 minutes from now?_
  * _How about 10 months from now?_
  * _How about 10 years from now?_

![10-10-10-rule](http://rype.rype.netdna-cdn.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/2016/07/big-picture-thinking-4-638.jpg)

It's easy to make short-term decisions that may be beneficial 10 minutes or 10
months from now, but these types of decisions usually don't benefit us in the
long-term. What's harder is to make decisions that may not appear attractive
or impactful in the short-term, but over time can have a positive impact in
your life.

Whenever you're struggling to go to the gym, resist temptations to eat junk
food, or overcoming the difficulties of [learning a new
skill](http://rypeapp.com/blog/learning-styles-master-skills/), use the
10/10/10/ Rule to think not only about how you'll feel about it later today,
but also years from today.

# 2\. True Fans

## Relationships

#### _"A True Fan is defined as someone who will purchase anything and
everything you produce. They will drive 200 miles to see you sing. They will
buy the super deluxe re-issued hi-res box set of your stuff even though they
have the low-res version. They have a Google Alert set for your name. They are
true fans."_  
_ -[Kevin Kelly](http://kk.org/thetechnium/1000-true-fans/), Founder of Wired
Magazine_

Kevin Kelly is world famous for being a futurist, technologist, and the
Executive Editor of Wired Magazine.

Amongst the many revolutionary school of thoughts that Kevin incepted, the
1,000 True Fans is definitely one of the most notable. The accessibility and
distribution of information today empowers any artist, creative, or
entrepreneur to make a real impact in their life and career by forming true
fans (whether it's 100, 1,000 or 10,000).

The point here is that instead of trying to please the mass, most of us will
be far better off by [making a few love us](http://rypeapp.com/blog/grew-
website-traffic/). While this mental model may be targeted at artists or
entrepreneurs, it can be applied to pretty much anything that involves
relationships.

Applying the model of True Fans to your current personal and professional
relationships will help you rethink and optimize how you're approaching these
relationships effectively. Having the _right_ person love you is often far
more beneficial than having a hundred who've just heard about you.

![true-fans](http://rype.rype.netdna-cdn.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/2016/07/1000-fans.jpg)

# 3\. Pareto's Law

## Being effective, not just efficient

#### _“Focus on being productive instead of busy.” _  
_-Tim Ferriss, New York Times Bestselling Author of The Four Hour Workweek_

In anything we do, there's always ~20% of activities that will deliver 80% of
our desired results.

The origin of [Pareto's Law](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pareto_principle)
came from an Italian Economist, Vilfredo Pareto, who noticed that 80% of
wealth and land were controlled by only 20% of the people. Today, this concept
has been applied to business, health, expenditures, etc.

For example:

  * 80% of our expenditures come from 20% of sources (i.e. rent, mortgage, transportation)
  * 80% of our profits come from [20% of customers](http://rypeapp.com/blog/how-we-used-the-word-no-to-grow-our-business/)
  * 80% of our happiness come from 20% of people in our lives

![paretos-law](http://rype.rype.netdna-cdn.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/07
/pareto_principle-1024x812.png)

It's easy to be wrapped up in 'busy' work without ever getting anything done.
Pareto's Law is a useful mental model to [be more
effective](http://rypeapp.com/blog/productivity-hacks/), rather than just be
efficient.

# 4\. Regret Minimization Framework

## Thinking long-term

When Jeff Bezos, the CEO of Amazon.com, was facing the dilemma of leaving his
steady job at a Hedge fund to start Amazon, he applied what he now calls the
"Regret Minimization Framework."

Here's his explanation of the mental model:

#### _"If you can project yourself out to age 80 and sort of think, 'What will
I think at that time?' it gets you away from some of the daily pieces of
confusion. That’s the kind of thing that in the short-term can confuse you,
but if you think about the long-term then you can really make good life
decisions that you won’t regret later."_  
_-Jeff Bezos, CEO of Amazon_

While Suzy's '10/10/10 Rule' focuses more on day to day short-term vs. long-
term decisions, Bezo's 'Regret Minimization Framework' is applicable for
anyone making big jumps in their personal and professional life.

It could be leaving a job to start a company like Bezo's, deciding to go [live
in another country](http://rypeapp.com/blog/traveling-alone-around-the-
world/), or even committing your life to someone else.

# 5. Eisenhower Matrix

## Time allocation

#### _"What is important is seldom urgent and what is urgent is seldom
important."_  
_-Dwight Eisenhower_

Dwight Eisenhower lived one of the most productive lives you can imagine.

Serving as the 34th President of the United States, he launched programs that
directly led to the development of the Interstate Highway System in the United
States, the launch of the internet (DARPA), the exploration of space (NASA),
and the peaceful use of alternative energy sources (Atomic Energy Act).

It's no wonder why his methods for [time management](http://rypeapp.com/blog
/find-more-time-in-your-schedule-to-learn-something-new/), decision making,
and [increasing productivity](http://rypeapp.com/blog/increase-productivity-
without-caffeine/) has been studied by many people.

![dwight-d-eisenhower](http://rype.rype.netdna-cdn.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/2016/07/dwight-d-eisenhower.jpg)

Out of the mental models Eisenhower used for smarter decision making, his most
productive one was the Eisenhower Matrix.

The way it works is simple.

Whenever he was faced with a decision, activity, or task, he categorized it
into one of four categories:

  1. Urgent and important (tasks you will do immediately).
  2. Important, but not urgent (tasks you will schedule to do later).
  3. Urgent, but not important (tasks you will delegate to someone else).
  4. Neither urgent nor important (tasks that you will eliminate).

![eisenhower-matrix](http://rype.rype.netdna-cdn.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/2016/07/eisenhower-matrix-1024x1007.png)

According to Stephen Covey, the bestselling author of _7 Habits of Highly
Effective People, _we should be spending a majority of our time in _#2:
Important, But Not Urgent._

The most important activities that truly move the needle rarely involve
putting out fires. Rather, it's activities or decisions that involve strategic
planning for the future -- personally or professionally.

It's just a matter of [making time for it in our
schedule](http://rypeapp.com/blog/too-busy-is-the-biggest-bullshit/), and the
most effective way to make time for it is to Delegate (#3) or Eliminate (#4)
the non-essential tasks.

# 6\. Parkinson's Law

## Saving time

#### _"Work expands so as to fill the time available for its completion."_

Willpower is finite. Some of us may have more than others, but it will always
plateau over time.

This is Parkinson's law.

![Parkinsons-law](http://rype.rype.netdna-cdn.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/2016/07/Parkinson_s_Law_ee7455ec-
1fc1-49f1-a3b9-56323078714c_large.jpg)

If we're given three hours to complete a task that normally would take an
hour, we'll find a way to fill those three hours. However, when we're down to
the final thirty minutes, we're suddenly feeling the pressure to get things
done.

This is a mental model that only you can apply yourself. It's unlikely that
your boss or organization will ask you to work less hours, which means you
need to place artificial time limitations when you're working.

Instead of giving yourself a week to complete a project, break it into smaller
activities, and set multiple deadlines during the week to finish them.

[Using restriction to your advantage](http://rypeapp.com/blog/not-to-do-list/)
will actually create _more _freedom for yourself, not less.

# 7\. Circle of Competence

## Doubling down on your strengths

#### _“I’m no genius. I’m smart in spots—but I stay around those spots.”_  
_ — Tom Watson Sr., Founder of IBM_

Throughout our lives, we've been told to fix our weaknesses instead of
focusing on our strengths.

But when you study the most successful athletes, business leaders, and
influencers, there's a consistent mantra that's preached -- stick to your
circle of competency.

#### _"You have to figure out what your own aptitudes are. If you play games
where other people have the aptitudes and you don’t, you’re going to lose. And
that’s as close to certain as any prediction that you can make. You have to
figure out where you’ve got an edge. And you’ve got to play within your own
circle of competence." -Warren Buffett_

![circle-of-competence](http://rype.rype.netdna-cdn.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/2016/07/coc.png)

It's unlikely that you're going to be the best tennis player in the world, as
well as being an Oscar-winning actor. Success in anything takes an immense
amount of discipline, sacrifice, and most importantly, time.  
We can work to expand our circle of competence over time, but become self-
aware enough to know where you stand today, and never be afraid to say "I
don't know."

# What are your mental models?

The more mental models we can refer to, the more likelihood of us making
smarter decisions when it matters. We've given you our top 6, and we'd love
for you to share any mental models that you've used to make better decisions.

_If you enjoyed this post, you'll also want to check out [The Ultimate Guide
on How to Learn Faster](http://rypeapp.com/blog/how-to-learn-faster/), and
[The Hidden Secret Behind Accelerated Learning: Why Introverts Learn
Faster](http://rypeapp.com/blog/accelerated-learning-introverts/)._

20.7k

Shares

[Share on
Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Frypeapp.com%2Fblog
%2Fmental-models-decision-making%2F)[Share on Twitter](https://twitter.com/int
ent/tweet?text=The%20Science%20Behind%20Smarter%20Decision%20Making%3A%207%20M
ental%20Models%20You%20Should%20Know&url=http://rypeapp.com/blog/mental-
models-decision-making/&via=rype_app)

![](http://rype.rype.netdna-cdn.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/sean-
cover-compressor-150x150.jpg)

**[Sean Kim**](http://rypeapp.com/blog/author/seanrypeapp-com/)

Sean is the CEO of [Rype](https://www.rypeapp.com/) (24/7 unlimited private
language lessons for busy people). He loves to travel while building &
investing in businesses. [Follow him on Facebook
here.](http://facebook.com/growthlist)  
  

  * Projects Worth

Very interesting model! Circle of competence is super.

If you want to know more about when and whether to invest in a project I
welcome you to visit our website <http://www.projectsworth.com>

We provide project valuations to help you make the right decision

    * Sean Kim

thanks!

[

__

Previous Post  The Hidden Secret Behind Accelerated Learning: Why Introverts
Learn Faster

](http://rypeapp.com/blog/accelerated-learning-introverts/)

[

__

Next Post  Complete Guide To Accelerate The Learning Curve: How Barack Obama
Beats Decision Fatigue

](http://rypeapp.com/blog/the-learning-curve/)

_Brought to you by the team behind [Rype.](http://rypeapp.com)  
Unlimited 1-on-1 Language Lessons  
For Busy People.  
  
_[Tell Me More!](https://rypeapp.com/)  
  
![](http://rype.rype.netdna-cdn.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/rype-
logo-60-height.png)

__

Copyright © 2016 Rype Inc. All Rights Reserved.

