# Adapting UX research in an Agile World

_Captured: 2016-10-31 at 19:07 from [medium.theuxblog.com](https://medium.theuxblog.com/adapting-ux-research-in-an-agile-world-68ce42b0605f#.m6mmt8q0w)_

Originally published by the very awesome folks at [UX
Mastery.](http://uxmastery.com/how-to-adapt-ux-research-for-an-agile-
environment/)

If you’re thinking that Agile development has almost completely taken over
software development, you’d be correct. In fact, according to [one 2015
survey](http://techbeacon.com/survey-agile-new-norm), only 2% of companies
still operate using purely traditional Waterfall practices. In short, Agile is
everywhere.

While there are many benefits to Agile, it’s meant that those of us in the
user experience field have had to examine and adapt our practices to stay in
tune. While we’ll no doubt continue to face working in this new world, a
little creativity and flexibility can help keep your UX research on track.

### What is Agile, anyway?

Before we get too much further, let’s first be clear about what we mean when
we talk about “Agile.” Agile is an approach to developing software. Agile
practices vary from company to company and even team to team, but there is a
shared set of [values](https://www.agilealliance.org/agile101/the-agile-
manifesto/) and [principles](https://www.agilealliance.org/agile101/12
-principles-behind-the-agile-manifesto/) that prioritises rapid, contiguous
release of live code, collaboration across cross-functional teams and users,
and a commitment to responding to changes.

Agile teams are cross-functional, and aim to create working code in very short
cycles called sprints. There are no distinct stages for discovery research and
requirements definition, design, development, or testing, like more
traditional development methods, often called Waterfall.

For those of us in user experience, this means we no longer have dedicated
time to thoroughly explore users or perform extensive discovery research, and
we’ll be figuring out the specifics of the design just in time for development
to begin. That’s a little scary for some of us, but it also means we get to
respond to the rapidly changing needs of the team and users, constantly
uncovering and acting on opportunities to improve the experience.

### What about Lean?

Lean is a set of business principles derived from the Lean manufacturing
system.The principles are centered around increasing efficiency and value,
removing waste and designing the system and teams in place to maximize those
efforts. While the principles are similar to those in Agile, Lean is more
focused on the holistic business and can be used in any industry, whereas
Agile is specifically focused on software development.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*usmU87jWHb7RN04u.jpg)

_Matt’s sketchnote of Jeff Gothelf’s UX Australia 2013 talk ‘__[Better Product
Definition Through Design Thinking and Lean UX_](http://www.flickr.com/photos/
uxmastery/9640532087/in/set-72157635322360489)_‘_

### One more piece of jargon, just for fun

To make things even more confusing, there is also a specific new product
development approach called the Lean Startup methodology. The Lean Startup is
centered around iterative experimentation cycles and using the learnings from
each to inform product development decisions.

Lean, Lean Startup and Agile are not mutually exclusive. Often, companies will
embrace the ideas of including constant validated learning from the Lean
Startup, approaches to reduce waste from Lean, and use the Agile development
approach to organise their teams and work structure.

While there are certainly well-documented challenges in incorporating UX
successfully into Agile practices, there are also tremendous benefits. Read on
to hear about some of the specific considerations of adapting UX practices to
Agile.

### Determining research methods for Agile

There are many existing resources on the best ways to determine which UX
research method you should employ to best answer your open questions. I
especially like [Christian Rohrer’s summary](https://www.nngroup.com/articles
/which-ux-research-methods/) (outlined in the table below), which lays out a
3-dimensional decision-making framework and provides notes about the position
in the product development cycle.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*KoZkiw5ZReKadueNbzkQOQ.png)

_Christian Rohrer’s summary of a 3-dimensional decision-making framework._

While his suggestions are spot on, when working in an Agile setting, there is
no longer dedicated time to focus on research, and you can’t always spend time
on the lengthier methods. Instead, you have to work research into the
relatively short sprint cycles — sometimes as short as 2 weeks.

The considerations for choosing research methods in an Agile environment
remain the same. You still need to:

  * Narrow down a specific question to answer and hypothesise about
  * Determine whether you’re looking for trends or reasons
  * Consider the most appropriate context for your research, and
  * Think through whether you need to look at behaviors or attitudes.

However, due to the limited timeframe in Agile, you often need to make a few
tweaks to successfully integrate your research. Tactics like breaking down
research questions into the smallest possible hypotheses and being willing to
flex the rules of traditional research methods are a huge help in keeping up
high quality UX in an Agile environment.

### Smaller hypotheses

For instance, let’s say that you’re working on a new version of an editor for
an existing online blogging platform, and you want to make sure that it’s
easier to use than the original version.

In traditional waterfall development, you’d fully flesh out a new and improved
version of the editor and it’s many features, then set forth to test the
hypothesis that your new design will perform better than the last. You’d
probably create a high-fidelity prototype and do a series of competitive
usability tests comparing the two experiences, making sure to include several
rounds with each target persona. The whole thing could take months.

In an Agile environment, you’d approach things quite differently. Let’s start
with the hypothesis that the new design will “perform better;” you could
easily break that into several hypotheses, each centered around specific
features or user groups.

For instance, you might write one hypothesis that goes something like, “If we
implement drag and drop formatting, our non-technical users will find it 30%
easier to lay out their blogs” and a follow up that goes something like, “If
we provide image editing, users will value our service more and include at
least 10% more imagery in their blogs.” You’d then work to prototype and test
the first element, drag and drop, before you start working on the image
editing.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*zPz5n0isgbLFroQj.jpg)

_In addition to focusing on investigating smaller components, you may need to
get creative about the methods you use to ensure that you make the most of
your research time and maximize results._

### Franken-methods and flexibility

In addition to focusing on investigating smaller components, you may need to
get creative about the methods you use to ensure that you make the most of
your research time and maximize results.

For instance, maybe you have a few hypotheses about different elements of the
product that are in different phases. You want to test the specific usability
of an already-prototyped interaction, and also need to follow up to understand
why an existing feature isn’t being used much. You’d typically want to run a
usability test to answer the first question and interviews to answer the
second. But instead, you could add a few interview questions at the end of the
usability test. Because the sessions are so narrowly focused on the specific
interaction, you should have plenty of time to mesh the two.

I’ve also found that as we need to push to faster and faster timelines, we’ve
been using more remote and unmoderated methods. There are well-documented cons
to not being able to be face-to-face with a user, but if your choices are to
skip interviews or do them with video-conferencing, definitely choose the
latter.

There are many other ways to flex methods that take some getting used to for
those of us who come from rigorous research backgrounds. For instance — maybe
you test a specific interaction’s usability with colleagues who aren’t
familiar with the project instead of recruiting outside users or don’t worry
whether you’re going to have statistically relevant results for a survey
response. Maybe instead of writing up a thorough findings report, have a short
debrief meeting where everyone shares their key takeaways and document just
those.

One trick that I find endlessly useful is to go ahead and proactively schedule
regular research sessions with users, especially if you can build up a panel
of willing participants. The logistics around scheduling participants can be
time-consuming, so setting up an ongoing process will streamline the process
and remove the excuse that you won’t have time to find and schedule
participants. With so many things in a state of perpetual flux, I guarantee
you’ll always have something to investigate.

Remember, the core tenets of successful UX research remain the same regardless
of the other considerations in your specific environment. Being creative and
flexible about your methods doesn’t let you off the quality hook, but it does
allow you to gain valuable insights in a way that makes most sense for the
collective team.

* * *

[Agile](https://medium.theuxblog.com/tagged/agile?source=post)[UX](https://med
ium.theuxblog.com/tagged/ux?source=post)[Lean](https://medium.theuxblog.com/ta
gged/lean?source=post)[UX Research](https://medium.theuxblog.com/tagged/ux-
research?source=post)[User Experience](https://medium.theuxblog.com/tagged
/user-experience?source=post)


