# Apple Said to Develop Car Operating System in BlackBerry Country

_Captured: 2016-10-25 at 23:11 from [www.bloomberg.com](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-25/apple-develops-car-operating-system-in-blackberry-country)_

October 25, 2016 — 2:12 PM EDT October 25, 2016 — 2:12 PM EDT

  * Canada office hires engineers from BlackBerry’s QNX unit 

  * Apple said to test self-driving software with virtual reality 

![](https://assets.bwbx.io/images/users/iqjWHBFdfxIU/ilGQ_i3.fisk/v0/640x-1.jpg)

Attendees enter the Bill Graham Civic Auditorium for the Apple World Wide
Developers Conference (WWDC) in San Francisco.

Photographer: Michael Short/Bloomberg

Apple Inc. has dozens of software engineers in Canada building a car operating
system, a rare move for a company that often houses research and development
projects close to its Cupertino, California headquarters, according to people
familiar with the matter.

Many of the engineers working in Canada were hired over the past year and
about two dozen came from BlackBerry Ltd.'s QNX, a leading automotive software
provider, the people said. They asked not to be identified discussing details
of a secret project.

The engineers now work at an Apple office in the Ottawa suburb of Kanata,
about a five-minute walk from QNX, the people said. Apple targeted QNX
employees because of their experience developing fundamental components of
operating systems and power management, a former QNX executive said. An Apple
spokesman declined to comment.

Exclusive insights in your inbox, from our technology reporters around the
world.

The most notable Apple hire from QNX was its chief executive officer, Dan
Dodge. Since joining Apple's Project Titan car initiative [early this
year](http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-07-28/apple-taps-blackberry-
talent-as-car-project-takes-software-turn), he's taken on a larger role
overseeing the car operating system, splitting his time between Canada and
California, the people said. Another notable addition is Derrick Keefe, who
left QNX last year after more than a decade as a senior engineer, one of the
people said.

The car operating system is the software core of a future Apple car platform,
in the same way iOS powers the iPhone. A separate Apple team is developing
software that would guide future self-driving cars and run on the operating
system, one of the people said.

The autonomous software was only one of many features once planned to run on
the car operating system. For example, Apple engineers envisioned a heads-up
display showing apps such as maps that could be manipulated by the company's
voice-based digital assistant Siri, according to a person familiar with the
matter.

The fate of these features depends on Project Titan's overall strategic
direction. Bob Mansfield, who took over the project in April, has given
engineers a [deadline](http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-17/how-
apple-scaled-back-its-titanic-plan-to-take-on-detroit) of next fall to prove
the self-driving technology before deciding on next steps, people familiar
with the matter have said.

Other Project Titan teams include a self-driving platform simulation group,
according to one of the people familiar with the situation. Apple has
developed simulators that use virtual reality to test the self-driving
software without taking the system onto public roads. That team now includes
VR expert Doug Bowman, another person said. He joined Apple in January,
according to the Financial Times.

![](https://assets.bwbx.io/images/users/iqjWHBFdfxIU/iZKX0I0gpWcY/v2/-1x-1.png
)

Apple's moves are a blow to BlackBerry, which often singles out QNX as a key
source of future growth. The QNX unit maintains the operating system used in
more than 60 million cars, mostly for "infotainment" systems like Ford Motor
Co.'s Sync.

In January, the Waterloo, Ontario-based company said it was working on
building out QNX's operating system so it could be used to run autonomous
driving software. And it has signed deals with self-driving car startups like
AdasWorks to integrate their technology into QNX.

"We're in a global world of big technology companies fighting for talent,"
Marty Beard, BlackBerry's chief operating officer, said, when asked about
Apple hiring QNX talent. "It's not surprising."

Beard said QNX is still growing and its plans to build autonomous-vehicle
software are still on track.

