# Consumer Reports ranks Tesla as one of the least reliable car brands on the planet

_Captured: 2016-10-25 at 22:18 from [bgr.com](http://bgr.com/2016/10/25/tesla-model-x-review-consumer-reports-reliability/)_

By [Yoni Heisler](http://bgr.com/author/yoni-heisler/) on Oct 25, 2016 at 1:46 PM

If it wasn't already, I think it's now safe to say that _Consumer Reports_'
on-and-off-again love affair with Tesla is officially over. In a new tally
ranking the 10 least reliable cars, the Model X makes an unceremonious
appearance, joining the likes of the Ford Fiesta and the Fiat 500L. That
Tesla's SUV made the list should hardly come as a surprise for anyone who has
been paying close attention to early reviews of the luxury vehicle. From
faulty doors and wonky electronics, some of the first impressions of the Tesla
Model X were far from positive.

Calling the gargantuan Model X "more showy than practical," _Consumer Reports_
identified the following problem areas with the vehicle: "Falcon-wing doors,
locks and latches, power equipment, in-car electronics, climate system."
That's quite a laundry list of problem areas, especially for a luxury SUV that
starts at $85,000.

With the Model X apparently tarnishing the entirety of Elon Musk's beloved
brand, Tesla [came in 25th](http://www.consumerreports.org/car-reliability
/car-brands-reliability-how-they-stack-up/) on _Consumer Reports'_ list of the
29 most reliable car brands, sandwiched between GMC and Dodge. As a point of
interest, the top 5 most reliable car brands were Lexus, Toyota, Buick, Audi
and Kia.

While most of _Consumer Reports'_ ire was directed at the Model X, recall that
the publication has also had some negative things to say about the Model S.
Just last year, for example, the publication pulled its recommendation for the
Model S citing reliability issues. "The main problem areas," the report said
at the time, "involved the drivetrain, power equipment, charging equipment,
giant iPad-like center console, and body and sunroof squeaks, rattles, and
leaks." Notably, Elon Musk was [quick to respond](http://bgr.com/2015/10/23
/tesla-model-s-consumer-reports-elon-musk/) to said allegations.

Though Consumer_ Reports_ can sometimes be a bit hasty its judgements, there's
no denying that early production models of the Model X were not quite up to
snuff with Tesla's stated standard of excellence. For instance, recall
_[Fortune's_ review](http://fortune.com/2016/05/19/tesla-model-x-test-drive/)
of the Model X from a few months back. While reviewer Sue Callaway found a lot
to like with Tesla's crossover SUV, she had a startling observation regarding
the seat design.

> Tesla promised me that the Model X's second-row seats move in such a way as
to allow a baby seat to be in place and yet still move to access the third
row. I borrowed a friend's three-month-old baby--yes, really--and her Uppababy
Mesa babyseat and discovered very quickly that the system moved the rear-
facing seat far enough forward to hit the back of the driver's seat. Worse, it
started to tip the second-row seats, squeezing the car seat's frame with the
baby in it. Definitely not okay.

In another instance of Tesla quality control gone awry, recall the experience
of Tesla enthusiast Byron Deeter who was one of the first owners to get behind
the wheel of a Model X. As an early adopter, Deeter was more than happy to
live with a few mildly frustrating bugs, but the problems he faced were truly
over the top. A few months ago, Deeter explained how the driver's side door on
his Model X wouldn't open from the outside, forcing him to enter in from the
passenger side and stretch out across the seats to open it up from the inside.
And as if that weren't enough, the door wouldn't fully close once he managed
to open it.

"I could manually close it, but the car couldn't sense that the door was shut,
so the electric control wouldn't latch," Deeter said a few months ago.
"Yesterday, I literally drove to a meeting holding the door closed."

"It's definitely a reminder that quality control with human mobility and
safety is critical," Deeter said [in an
interview](http://techcrunch.com/2016/04/20/tesla-model-x-owners-finding-car-
doors-wont-shut-windows-wont-close/) with TechCrunch at the time. "In this
case, Tesla did push out some software and maybe some hardware that wasn't
quite ready for prime time."

Addressing many of the initial complaints that surfaced with early Model X
owners, Tesla back in April issued the following statement.

"We are committed to making the world's most reliable cars," Tesla said.
"While we have seen some issues with early Model X builds, the issues are not
widespread, and we are working closely with each owner to respond quickly and
proactively to address any problems. We will continue to do so until each
customer is fully satisfied. This commitment is one of the reasons why 98% of
our customers say they will buy another Tesla as their next car."

Indeed, Tesla Model X owners do seem to be overwhelmingly satisfied, but that
data point apparently doesn't factor into Consumer Reports' reliability
calculus.

Source:
**[Consumer Reports**](http://www.consumerreports.org/car-reliability/car-brands-reliability-how-they-stack-up/)


