# How connected cars are turning into revenue-generating machines

_Captured: 2016-11-01 at 13:13 from [techcrunch.com](https://techcrunch.com/2016/08/28/how-connected-cars-are-turning-into-revenue-generating-machines/?ncid=rss)_

![](https://tctechcrunch2011.files.wordpress.com/2016/08/gettyimages-477011015.jpg?w=1146)


History repeats herself, but she mumbles. Some have expressed that she enjoys
rhymes or puns. One must lean in close and listen carefully to understand
exactly what she’s getting at. Most of the time we can only in retrospect
discern what she was trying to say.

Sometimes, though, history’s intent is clear. Evidence suggests a chain of
events that will yield to an educated guess of the near future. That’s where
we stand right now with the state of connected cars: History is repeating
itself, with a slight variation. There is a close correspondence in the
patterns of disruption when you compare the future of connected cars to the
past of the smartphone industry.

At some point within the next two to three years, consumers will come to
expect car connectivity to be standard, similar to the adoption curve for [GPS
navigation](http://www.motortrend.com/news/15-features-now-available-
mainstream-cars-used-luxury-cars/). As this new era begins, the telecom metric
of ARPU will morph into ARPC (average revenue per car). Note: In this case,
the term “connected” brings together related concepts, such as Wi-Fi,
Bluetooth and evolving cellular networks, including 3G, 4G/LTE, 5G, etc.

In that time frame, automotive OEMs will see a variety of revenue-generating
touch points for connected vehicles at gas stations, electric charging
stations and more. We also should expect progressive mobile carriers to gain
prominence as essential links in the automotive value chain within those same
two to three years.

Early in 2016, that transitional process began with the quiet but dramatic
announcement of a statistic that few noted at the time. The industry crossed a
critical threshold in the first quarter when [net adds of connected
cars](http://chetansharma.com/usmarketupdateq12016.htm) (32 percent) rose
above the net adds of smartphones (31 percent) for the very first time. At the
top of the mobile carrier chain, AT&T led the world with around eight million
connected cars already plugged into its network.

The next big event to watch for in the development of ARPC will be when
connected cars trigger a significant redistribution of revenue among the value
chain players. In this article, I will focus mostly on recurring connectivity-
driven revenue. I will also explore why automakers must develop deep
relationships with mobile carriers and Tier-1s to hold on to their pieces of
the pie in the connected-car market by establishing control points.

> After phones, cars will be the biggest category for mobile-data consumption.

It’s important to note here that my conclusions on the future of connected
cars are not shared by everyone. One top industry executive at a large mobile
carrier recently asked me, “Why do we need any other form of connectivity when
we already have mobile phones?” Along the same lines, some connected-car
analysts have suggested that [eSIM technology](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse
/how-connected-watch-change-car-business-roger-c-lanctot) will encourage
consumers to simply add to their existing wireless plans connectivity in their
cars.

Although there are differing points of view, it’s clear to me that built-in
embedded-SIM for connectivity will prevail over tethering with smartphones.
The role of [Tier-1s](http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/connected-car-
market-report-2016-2026-565754811.html) will be decisive for both carriers and
automakers as they build out the future of the in-car experience, including
infotainment, telematics, safety, security and system integration services.

## The sunset of smartphone growth

Consider the U.S. mobile market as a trendsetter for the developed world in
terms of data-infused technology. You’ll notice that [phone revenues are
declining](http://www.computerworld.com/article/3040321/smartphones/us-saw-6
-overall-drop-in-smartphone-sales-last-quarter-research-firm-says.html). Year-
over-year sales of mobiles have registered a 6.5 percent drop in North America
and have had an even more dramatic 10.8 percent drop in Europe. This is
because of a combination of total market saturation and economic uncertainty,
which encourages consumers to hold onto their phones longer.

While consumer phone upgrades have slowed, non-phone connected devices are
becoming a significant portion of net-adds and new subscriptions. TBR analyst
Chris Antlitz summed up the [future mobile
market](http://www.computerworld.com/article/3027038/mobile-wireless/seeking-
new-revenue-att-and-verizon-eye-the-internet-of-things.html): “What we are
seeing is that the traditional market that both carriers [AT&T and Verizon] go
after is saturated, since pretty much everyone who has wanted a cell phone
already has one… Both companies are getting big into IoT and machine-to-
machine and that’s a big growth engine.”

At the same time, AT&T and Verizon are both showing a significant uptick in
IoT revenue, even though we are still in the early days of this industry. AT&T
crossed the $1 billion mark and [Verizon posted
earnings](http://www.verizon.com/about/news/verizon-caps-transformational-
year-strong-balanced-4q-results) of $690 million in the IoT category for last
year, with 29 percent of that total in the fourth quarter alone.

## Data and telematics

While ARPU is on the decline, data is consuming a larger portion of the pie.
Just consider some astonishing facts about data usage growth from [Cisco’s
](http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/service-provider/visual-
networking-index-vni/mobile-white-paper-c11-520862.html)[Visual Networking
Index](http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/service-provider
/visual-networking-index-vni/mobile-white-paper-c11-520862.html) 2016\. Global
mobile data traffic grew 74 percent over the past year, to more than 3.7
exabytes per month. Over the past 10 years, we’ve seen a 4,000X growth in data
usage. After phones, cars will be the biggest category for mobile-data
consumption.

Most cars have around [150 different microprocessor-
controlled](http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/columnist/2016/06/28/your-
average-car-lot-more-code-driven-than-you-think/86437052/) sub-systems built
by different functional units. The complexity of integrating these systems
adds to the time and cost of manufacturing. Disruptive companies like Tesla
are challenging that model with a holistic design of telematics. As eSIM
becomes a standard part of the [telematics control
unit](http://www.gartner.com/it-glossary/telematics/) (TCU), it could create
one of the biggest disruptive domino effects the industry has seen in recent
years. That’s why automakers must develop deep relationships with mobile
carriers and Tier-1s.

> The consumer life cycle for connected cars will initially have to be much
longer than it is for smartphones.

Virtualization of our cars is inevitable. It will have to involve separate but
interconnected systems because the infrastructure is inherently different for
control versus convenience networks. Specifically, instrument clusters,
telematics and infotainment environments have very different requirements than
those of computing, storage and networking. To create a high-quality
experience, automakers will have to work through hardware and software issues
holistically.

Already we see Apple’s two-year [iPhone release
schedule](http://www.cnet.com/news/apple-iphone-slickest-releases-may-hit-3
-year-upgrade-cycle/) expanding to a three-year span because of gentler
innovations and increasing complexity. The consumer life cycle for connected
cars will initially have to be much longer than it is for smartphones because
of this deep integration required for all the devices, instruments and
functionalities that operate the vehicle.

## Five factors unique to connected cars

Disruption is everywhere within the auto industry, similar to the disruption
that shook out telecom. However, there are several critical differences:

  * **Interactive/informative surface.** The mobile phone has one small screen with all the technology packed in behind it. Inside a car, nearly every surface could be transformed into an interactive interface. Beyond the instrumentation panel, which has been gradually claiming more real estate on the steering wheel, there will be growth in backseat and rider-side infotainment screens. (Semi-) autonomous cars will present many more possibilities.
  * **Processing power.** The cloud turned mobile phones into smart clients with all the heavy processing elsewhere, but each car can contain a portable data center all its own. Right now, the NVIDIA Tegra X1 mobile [processor for connected cars](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/news/11609406/The-car-of-the-future-is-the-most-powerful-computer-you-will-ever-own.html), used to demonstrate its Drive CX cockpit visualizations, can handle one trillion floating-point operations per second (flops). That’s roughly the same computing power as a 1,600-square-foot supercomputer from the year 2000.
  * **Power management.** The size and weight of phones were constrained for many years by the size of the battery required. The same is true of cars, but in terms of power and processing instead of the physical size and shape of the body frame. Consider apps like Pokémon Go, which are known as battery killers because of their extensive use of the camera for augmented reality and constant GPS usage. In the backseat of a car, Pokémon Go could run phenomenally with practically no affect on the car battery. Perhaps car windows could even serve as augmented reality screens.
  * **Risk factors.** This is the No. 1 roadblock to connected cars right now. The jump from consumer-grade to automotive-grade security is just too great for comfort. Normally, when somebody hacks a phone, nobody gets hurt physically. A [cybersecurity report](http://www.tu-auto.com/cyber-security/) this year pointed out that connected cars average 100 million lines of code, compared to only 8 million for a Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II fighter jet. In other words, security experts have a great deal of work to do to protect connected cars from hackers and random computer errors.
  * **Emotional affinity.** Phones are accessories, but a car is really an extension of the driver. You can see this aspect in the pride people display when showing off their cars and their emotional attachment to their cars. This also explains why driverless cars and services like Uber are experiencing a hard limit on their market penetration. For the same reasons, companies that can’t provide flawless connectivity in cars could face long-lasting damage to their brand reputations.

## Software over hardware

The value in connected cars will increasingly concentrate in software and
applications over the hardware. The connected car will have a vertical
hardware stack closely integrated with a horizontal software stack. To
dominate the market, a player would need to decide where their niche lies
within the solution matrix.

However, no matter how you view the hardware players and service stack, there
is a critical role for mobility, software and services. These three will form
the framework for experiences, powered by analytics, data and connectivity.
Just as content delivered over the car radio grew to be an essential channel
for ad revenue in the past, the same will be true in the future as newer forms
of content consumption arise from innovative content delivery systems in the
connected car.

> In the big picture, though, connectivity is only part of the story.

As the second-most expensive lifetime purchase (after a home) for the majority
of consumers, a car is an investment unlike any other. Like fuel and
maintenance, consumers will fund connectivity as a recurring expense, which we
could see through a variety of vehicle touch points. There’s the potential for
carriers to partner with every vehicle interaction that’s currently on the
market, as well as those that will be developed in the future.

When consumers are filling up at the gas pump, they could pay via their
connected car wallet. In the instance of charging electric cars while inside a
store, consumers could also make payments on the go using their vehicles. The
possibilities for revenue generation through connected cars are endless. Some
automakers may try the Kindle-like model to bundle the hardware cost into the
price of the car, but most mobile carriers will prefer it to be spread out
into a more familiar pricing model with a steady stream of income.

## Monetization of the connected car

Once this happens and carriers start measuring ARPC, it will force other
industry players to rethink their approach more strategically. For example,
bundling of mobile, car and home connectivity will be inevitable for app, data
and entertainment services as an integrated experience. In the big picture,
though, connectivity is only part of the story. Innovative carriers will
succeed by going further and perfecting an in-car user experience that will
excite consumers in ways no one can predict right now. As electric vehicles
(EVs), hydrogen-powered fuel cells and [advances in
solar](http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-volkswagen-sma-solar-idUKKCN10N1SB)
gain market practicality, cars may run without gas, but they will not run
without connectivity.

The first true killer app for connected cars is likely to be some form of new
media, and the monetization potential will be vast. With Gartner forecasting a
market of [250 million connected
cars](http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2970017) on the road by 2020,
creative methods for generating revenue streams in connected cars won’t stop
there. Over the next few years, we will see partnerships proliferate among
industry players, particularly mobile carriers. The ones who act fast enough
to assume a leadership role in the market now will drive away with an
influential status and a long-term win — if history has anything to say about
it.
