# How to Stay in Touch with Connected Cars

_Captured: 2016-10-27 at 22:57 from [www.ansiblemotion.com](https://www.ansiblemotion.com/automotive-driver-in-the-loop-simulation-articles/how-to-stay-in-touch-with-connected-cars?utm_campaign=Awareness&utm_content=34496201&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter)_


![Automotive driver-in-the-loop simulation articles](https://www.ansiblemotion.com/hubfs/images/Automotive-driver-in-the-loop-simulation-articles-1060-1.jpg?t=1476732731167)


![connected cars and simulation](https://www.ansiblemotion.com/hs-fs/hubfs/Blog_Images/stay-in-touch-connected-cars-and-simulation.jpg?t=1476732731167&width=320&name=stay-in-touch-connected-cars-and-simulation.jpg)

These are still the early days for the [human-machine interfaces](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_interface) (HMI) that will be crucial to the success of autonomous vehicles. And it’s unclear whether cross-industry standards will emerge regarding the application of autonomous technologies – not just in terms of functionality, but in the _way_  that conceptual HMIs convey functionality to drivers / occupants.

Meanwhile, today’s ADAS technologies are beginning to inform automobile
drivers of the safety benefits that new developments can bring, as well as
helping them to become accustomed to the feeling of a car that is momentarily
taking control. But are we, ourselves, running the risk of becoming un-
connected from “connected” vehicles?

**The Human Element**

Within the automotive industry the latest generation of [Driver-in-the-Loop
(DIL) simulators](/driving-simulator-products) provides a mechanism for
exploring the intricate relationship between drivers / occupants with piloted
and/or conveyance vehicles. This is accomplished by creating realistic and
immersive human surroundings inside a laboritory – including visual, acoustic,
haptic and tactile, and motion cues such as ride frequencies and vehicle
dynamic inputs – all the feedbacks that allow real people to interact
realistically with virtual vehicles and imagined systems.

These imagined vehicle concepts can then be placed into geo-specific or
representative environments wherein everything imaginable can be explored –
from roadway hazards to interactions with other intelligent objects such as
cars, pedestrians, and advanced infrastructure elements.  Not only does this
provide a safe environment for exploring what might be otherwise considered
dangerous scenarios, but it also provides a controlled, repeatable observation
platform from which to gather objective measurements on human and vehicle
behaviors.

_Connected Car speaks with Ansible Motion about connecting people with cars_

Using DIL simulators, the feedback loop of real people reacting to
technologies – which are, in turn, responding to people's reactions – can be
examined in a way that’s impossible to gauge accurately with Software-in-the-
Loop (SIL) or [Hardware-in-the-Loop (HIL)](/ansible-motion-automotive-driver-
in-the-loop-simulation-news/right-on-cue-human-and-hardware-in-the-loop-
simulation-h2il) testing alone.  In a sense, DIL simulation is a mechanism
whereby the human touch can be brought back into the mix of core vehicle
developments.

**Who’s in Charge?**

One example is in the handover of (pilot task) control. A handover from human
to an artificial intelligence can create some problematic ‘corner cases’ near
the edges of normal parameter mapping, but the switch from driverless control
back to the human can sometimes present an even bigger challenge. What is the
cognitive state of the human? Is he or she paying attention and/or ready to
resume the (piloting) task? What if the driver is not yet ready to be a driver
again when handover initiates? All of these possibilities must be studied.

Another example is the case where a (human) driver assumes that he or she is
in full control, but an assistive or semi-autonomous system assumes that some
intervention is required. This could range from a very subtle interference, to
a very direct, counterintuitive one, perhaps based on a logical derivative of
a known safety case. If the augmentation assists the human driver in a way
that is startling or unexpected, how does the human then react? Will the
startle response produce statistically measurable reactions from human drivers
that can be used to inform the AI system? If so, a DIL simulator lab might be
the only practical way to collect enough information to make informed system /
controller logic decisions and test their effectiveness in andvance of market
deployment.

**Practice Makes Perfect**

In this and many other cases a controlled, repeatable laboratory environment
that engages real people in the experimentation process becomes the ideal
place to perform exploratory and comparative studies. Scenarios and conditions
(both environmental and vehicular) can be created and modified as needed in
order to gain statistical confidence in what would otherwise be a staggering
array of possibilities. And no matter what the outcome of a particular
experiment – good or bad, life-saving intervention or (virtual) collision,
incident-inducer or scare – the test has been conducted in total safety via
DIL simulation.  An experiment ends calmly, and man and machine are ready to
have another go, in search of solutions that will keep us connected – while
making sure that we are actually staying in touch.

To learn more about how engineering class Driver-in-the-Loop (DIL) simulators
are emerging as a primary vehicle development tool for the cars of tomorrow,
download our FREE white paper_, “_[Look Down the Road: Driving Simulator
Technology & How Automotive Manufacturers will Benefit.](/driving-simulator-
technology-and-how-automotive-manufacturers-will-benefit)_”_
