# Roads Signs Are As Important To The Future Of Driverless Cars As Artificial Intelligence

_Captured: 2016-10-29 at 12:42 from [arc.applause.com](https://arc.applause.com/2016/10/25/intelligent-infrastructure-autonomous-cars/)_

[ ![](/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/arcLogoLinesThick.svg)
](https://arc.applause.com/) [ ](http://www.applause.com)

Menu

  * [Topics](/topics/)
    * [Apps Economy](/category/apps-economy/)
    * [Mobile](/category/mobile/)
    * [Connected World](/category/connected-world/)
    * [The Web](/category/web/)
    * [Design Playhouse](/category/design/)
    * [Wearables](/category/wearables/)
    * [Developer Corner](/category/development/)
    * [QA Lounge](/category/qa-lounge/)
  * [Research](/category/research/)
  * [Subscribe](/Subscribe)

  * [Topics](/topics/)
    * [Apps Economy](/category/apps-economy/)
    * [Connected World](/category/connected-world/)
    * [Design Playhouse](/category/design/)
    * [Developer Corner](/category/development/)
    * [QA Lounge](/category/qa-lounge/)
    * [Mobile](/category/mobile/)
    * [The Web](/category/web/)
    * [Wearables](/category/wearables/)
  * [Research](/category/research/)
  * [Subscribe](/Subscribe)

[Connected World](https://arc.applause.com/category/connected-world/)

October 25th, 2016

# Roads Signs Are As Important To The Future Of Driverless Cars As Artificial
Intelligence

Part of the ["Roaming Around: The New Travel
Industry"](https://arc.applause.com/series/roaming-around-the-new-travel-
industry/) Series

Mobile App Testing Learn tips, techniques and trends for launching great
mobile apps [Get It Now](http://go.applause.com/the-essential-guide-to-mobile-
app-testing.html?ls=Banner%20Ad&cc=Fr&mc=Display-ARC-MobileAppTesting)

Like what you're reading? Subscribe to the weekly newsletter. [Subscribe For
Free](https://arc.applause.com/subscribe/)

written by [Dan Rowinski](https://arc.applause.com/author/drowinski/)

[Automation](https://arc.applause.com/tag/automation/)[Connected
Car](https://arc.applause.com/tag/connected-car/)

“If we look at it in a very basic level, automated and connected vehicles, to
make this happen … it requires an ecosystem to work together.”

Vehicle-to-vehicle communication is critical for the future of the autonomous
car.

But vehicle-to-infrastructure communication is what will tie everything
together.

“If we look at it in a very basic level, automated and connected vehicles, to
make this happen … it requires an ecosystem to work together,” said Tammy
Meehan Russell, global portfolio manager for intelligent transportation at 3M.
“Very basically that ecosystem is vehicle, human and infrastructure.”

While visiting the University of Michigan’s Mobility Transformation Center in
Ann Arbor, our group of reporters was given a tour of Mcity, a testing and
training ground for autonomous, automated and self-driving vehicles.

Mcity is a 32-acre artificial town built by MTC and opened in July 2015 for
the specific purpose of testing autonomous cars in real world conditions. Just
about everything an autonomous car might encounter is represented at Mcity:
different kinds of roadways (concrete pavement, grooved pavement etc.),
different kinds of road signs and lines, various types of traffic signals,
highway conditions, urban conditions and so forth.

![mcity_street](https://arc.applause.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10
/mcity_street-1024x671.jpg)

“Mcity was built with all of the features of a real roadway but in a way that
we can test things there repeat-ably and reliably,” said MTC deputy director
Carrie Morton. “So we don’t just have to wait for happenstance on public
roads. For example that pedestrian to cross the vehicle as a certain angle
that has been found to be a blind spot of vehicle’s perception centers. We can
actually design tests that repeat-ably and reliably test those scenarios that
we find on the roadway.”

**See also: [How The Future Of Driverless Cars Will Roll Out In Tiers](https://arc.applause.com/2016/10/19/autonomous-and-driverless-cars-future/)**

Mcity even has a grated roadway, such as you might find on a bridge in a city,
because it is these types of odd roadways that can throw a huge wrench in the
functioning of a self-driving car’s sensors. The radar of an autonomous car
bounces through the grate and back up, making the car think that a giant wall
is in front of it.

## Dumb Infrastructure Rebuilt To Enhance The Autonomous Vehicle

Even the infrastructure that you normally would not think twice about is
integral to [driverless car functionality](https://www.applause.com/smart-
cars/).

For instance: road signs and lines.

Travel App Testing Learn the unique challenges and opportunities with
launching winning travel apps [Get It Now](http://go.applause.com/travel-app-
testing ?ls=Banner%20Ad&cc=Fr&mc=Display-ARC-TravelAppTesting)

An autonomous car uses a variety of sensors to know where it is and where it
is going (not including things like GPS or cellular location). It has cameras
that employ computer vision and machine learning. Cars can use radar and LiDAR
to inspect objects around it. As all of these sensors help the car move
through the world, the infrastructure takes on a greater aspect of importance.

Believe it or not, how road signs are built takes into account a fair degree
of science. The signs need to be big enough to be seen with the human eye
while traveling at 80 miles-per-hour or greater. The signs need to be seen
during the day and at night, in sunny weather or rain or snow. Different kinds
of vehicles have different viewing angles (the difference between a semi truck
or a Prius, for instance). It’s not an easy problem and those big highway
signs cost a lot of money.

![mcity_tower](https://arc.applause.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10
/mcity_tower-1024x631.jpg)

The biggest maker of road signs in the U.S. is 3M, known primarily as the
originator of Scotch tape and industrial adhesives. 3M has a large automotive
sector with an office in the suburbs outside of Detroit that works, primarily,
to make adhesives for putting cars together.

3M is one of the 60 partners of MTC. At Mcity, 3M is responsible for the road
signs and lines on the road that guide autonomous cars around the facility.
The lines have a special metal mesh that helps the sensors of an autonomous
car know where they are going.

**See also: [Why Tesla Cannot Definitely Not Call Its Cars "Driverless"](https://arc.applause.com/2016/10/20/tesla-autopilot-autonomous-car/)**

“How do we also provide materials on the road that will start to communicate
with these sensors and these systems knowing that there is software behind
it,” said 3M’s Meehan Russell. “There is a different level of observation.
There is a different field of view for each of these sensors.”

In Michigan, the law states that road lines must be painted every year. Other
states have different regulations (with weather a significant factor), but
three years is about the maximum. Thus, companies like 3M have the opportunity
to update the infrastructure of America’s roads to better support the sensors
of an autonomous vehicle sooner than later.

## Connecting Infrastructure And The Connected Car

3M and MTC work together on a connected infrastructure tool called a Dedicated
Short Range Communications “sniffer.” The purpose of the sniffer is to
[communicate with cars](https://www.applause.com/smart-cars/) in its vicinity
wirelessly.

The sniffer is used specifically as a research tool. It takes data packets
from connected cars in traffic and can send that data back to researchers to
look for patterns or problems.

“If you think of DSRC as another sensor, it is a wireless communication
sensor,” said Meehan Russell. “We are now getting into Levels Three and Four
on the connected infrastructure side. This is the around-the-corner sensors.”

The researchers at MTC have a variety of sniffers and Roadside Units (RSUs)
sending and receiving data around Ann Arbor. During a test drive, one sensor
was placed to say that the speed limit was 19 miles per hour around a corner.
Another sensor warned of ice. When you drive through those areas, a warning
light comes up in the vehicle to slow down.

![mcity_bike](https://arc.applause.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/mcity_bike-
1024x680.jpg)

“We don’t think these things can be independent. We think we need both. In
order to accomplish this movement we need automation and connectivity to make
this happen,” said Meehan Russell. “If you look at the technologies just on
the connected side, there are additional challenges here we have to look at.”

The App Quality Imperative Creating Apps that Win - 5 Challenges and 5
Solutions [Get It Now](http://go.applause.com/the-app-quality-
imperative.html?ls=Banner%20Ad&cc=Fr&mc=Display-ARC-AppQualityImperative)

A big intersection about a mile from the MTC facility has a RSU, a small grey
box, sitting on the pole with traffic lights. The sniffer knows when the car
is approaching the intersection, how fast it travels through it and other
related data. The unit has a minimum range of 300 meters within line-of-sight
and uses signal phase and timing (SPAT) to monitor traffic and connected car
signals. The RSU could, theoretically, help move traffic through the
intersection.

“What better to tell the vehicle to go into the intersection than … the
intersection?” said Debbie Bezzina, senior program manager at the University
of Michigan Transportation Research Institute.

Imagine if the entire country was outfitted with infrastructure designed
specifically to assist autonomous vehicles? Technologists like to espouse the
virtues of machine learning, artificial intelligence, sensors, algorithms,
neural networks and the like to hype the future of the autonomous vehicle. But
that is only one side of the equation. Connectivity—between cars and from
vehicles to infrastructure—is going to play a massive role in the evolution of
the driverless future.

"Communication will help cars or automated vehicles to see more clearly and
further," said UM MTC director Dr. Huei Peng. "Future road infrastructure
needs to be designed to support those human drivers and robot drivers … It is
good to have some companies focusing on the infrastructure for robot drivers.
We think we need have a very systemic way of understanding how these cameras,
radar, LiDAR see the environment and we design the infrastructure for them to
be driving on the road safely."

Part of the ["Roaming Around: The New Travel
Industry"](https://arc.applause.com/series/roaming-around-the-new-travel-
industry/) Series

### You May Also Like

[Connected World](https://arc.applause.com/category/connected-world/)

## [How The Future Of Driverless Cars Will Evolve In
Tiers](https://arc.applause.com/2016/10/19/autonomous-and-driverless-cars-
future/)

[Dan Rowinski](https://arc.applause.com/author/drowinski/) • October 19th,
2016

[Connected World](https://arc.applause.com/category/connected-world/)

## [Why Tesla Can Definitely Not Call Its Cars
"Driverless"](https://arc.applause.com/2016/10/20/tesla-autopilot-autonomous-
car/)

[Dan Rowinski](https://arc.applause.com/author/drowinski/) • October 20th,
2016

[Connected World](https://arc.applause.com/category/connected-world/)

## [Driverless Cars Will Need An Intelligent, Connected
Infrastructure](https://arc.applause.com/2016/10/24/autonomous-cars-connected-
infrastructure/)

[Dan Rowinski](https://arc.applause.com/author/drowinski/) • October 24th,
2016

  * [Mission](/mission-statement/)
  * [Ethics](/ethics-statement/)
  * [Terms](/terms-conditions/)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy/)
  * [RSS Feed](/feed/)
  * [Contact Us](/contact-us/)

  * [ ](https://twitter.com/applause)
  * [ ](http://www.linkedin.com/company/applause)
  * [ ](https://google.com/+Applause360)
  * [ ](https://facebook.com/applause)
  * [Subscribe For Free](https://arc.applause.com/subscribe/)

(C)2016 Applause App Quality Inc.

[CodeProject](https://arc.applause.com)


