# The rise of new automotive companies

_Captured: 2016-10-30 at 19:15 from [techcrunch.com](https://techcrunch.com/2016/10/30/the-rise-of-new-automotive-companies/?ncid=rss)_

The [Cité de l’Automobile](http://www.citedelautomobile.com/) in Mulhouse,
France, is an amazing place. It has the largest collection of automobiles on
display, thanks to the Swiss brothers Hans and Fritz Schlumpf and their
obsession with cars. The money they needed for their collecting came from
their business; the brothers owned a spinning mill for woolen products.
Funnily enough, the German translation of “Schlumpf” is smurf. If anyone
remembers the Smurfs, they would call it smurftastic.

Because of their excessive collection — and also because of the shift in
textile production toward Asia in the 1970s — the brothers’ business
eventually became insolvent, so they left France and returned to Switzerland.
By that time, their collection of automobiles was so valuable that the French
government placed a historical protection order on the collection to save it
from destruction, break-up or export, and, in 1978 it was deemed a French
Historic Monument by the Council of State.

Some years ago I had the privilege of visiting this place, which is now the
largest car museum in the world. Indeed, it is a time capsule for the glory
days of the automobile. When you walk through the museum’s enormous halls,
filled with hundreds of classic cars, you see that most of them are from a
time when “startups” (yes, I think you could attribute today’s term to those
past entrepreneurs) built cars from scratch, creating brands and fighting for
their own piece of the new mobility market. Horses were no longer a state-of-
the-art form of transportation, thus horse riding ultimately became a luxury
hobby, as we now know it.

The first auto boom was fueled by the invention of new technologies and the
industrial revolution, which gave startups at that time the chance to engineer
and build the first automobiles with a limited amount of funding. For example,
in the 1920s, the main construction method was body-on-frame, which allowed a
much more modular construction and the combination of parts from different
suppliers. Then the unibody designs came and introduced highly integrated cars
with more expensive set-up and development costs — but with positive cost
effects on a large scale. With EV we now see the return of concepts with body-
on-frame, like the BMW i3 with a rigid frame housing the drivetrain and
battery.

The following names are just a fraction of the brands represented in the
museum in Mulhouse. You can call yourself a true automobile expert if you
recognize more than three of the brand names, and, if you do, the next drink
is on me: ABC, Amilcar, Arzens, Aster, Ballot, Bardon, Barraco, Barré,
Baudier, B.N.C, Bollée, Brasier, Charron, Cisitalia, Clément de Dion, Clément-
Bayard, Clément-Panhard, Corre La Licorne, Darracq, Decauville, De Dietrich,
De Dion-Bouton, Delage, Delahaye, Delaunay-Belleville, Dufaux, Ensais,
Esculape, Farman, Fouillaron, Georges Richard, Gladiator, Gordini, Horlacher,
Hotchkiss et Cie, Hotchkiss-Gregoire, Jaquot, Le Zèbre, Lorraine-Dietrich,
M.A.F., Mathis, Maurer-Union, Menier, Minerva, Monet-Goyon, Mors, Neracar,
O.M., Panhard & Levassor, Pegaso, Philos, Piccard-Pictet, Pilain, Ravel,
Rheda, Richard-Brasier, Ripert, Rochet-Schneider, Sage, Salmson, Scott,
Sénéchal, Serpollet, Sizaire-Naudin, Soncin, Turicum, Vermotel, Violet-Bogey,
Zedel.

These fine startups produced motor vehicles in a time when the entry barrier
was not yet defined by the combustion engine — a market that was ultimately
dominated for more than 40 years by the likes of GM, Ford, Mercedes, Toyota,
BMW, VW and others. This left a huge gap between the big guys and the smaller
players, such as McLaren, Bugatti, Lotus and others.

Certainly there were startups like DeLorean, Fisker and Artega, but developing
a combustion engine car, manufacturing, marketing and selling it, not to
mention maintaining a dealer value chain, was (some say still is) a game
dominated by size and pure financial power. Successfully creating a new
startup in the car category was no easy task. Every venture receiving less
than an estimated $100 million investment would fail, sooner or later.
Especially for investors, this category was largely viewed as untouchable, due
to the extensive risk involved and a low success rate.

> We are seeing a large number of new startups aiming to create new cars,
commercial vehicles and other methods of transportation.

That all changed with one guy and a roadshow in Taiwan in 2004. He was trying
to secure funding there, and in various other places, for his first model: the
Roadster. Most components of the prototype car at that time were sourced and
developed on this island of 23 million people, which is famous for supplying
more than 80 percent of the world’s PC and Notebook manufacturers, delivering
nearly all chips for the iPhones and other consumer electronic devices, as
well as being known for its own manufacturing powerhouses, including Foxconn,
Pegatron and Wistron.

At the time of Tesla’s launch in 2006, the company’s engines were manufactured
at the Tesla facility in Taiwan. Elon Musk understood from the very beginning
that the IT and automotive worlds would intersect. He secured the initial
funding and started to think big — not listening to the advice from many so-
called experts. Tesla raised more than $180 million by 2009, to deliver 147
cars.

Several years, and billions in investments later, the world sees that Tesla
was able to do what other companies never dared — attack the traditional
heavyweight car industry. Because of computer power, a new level of momentum
and the state of evolution, we are now entering another chapter in the
“[Innovator’s
Dilemma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Innovator%27s_Dilemma)” This
theory, purported by Harvard professor Clayton Christensen, describes when new
technologies cause great firms to fail. And more importantly, competitive
products have been created that premium companies like Audi, BMW, Toyota and
Mercedes now take very seriously.

The huge financial and technology barriers have been broken down. The venture
capital world is delighted by the opportunities and has begun to attack this
category. Over the last five years the M&A transactions in this space have
grown in excess of $220 billion.

Entry barriers based on highly sophisticated production, such as the
combustion engine, will be phased out. Electric components are becoming more
mainstream. For instance, e-drivetrains are outsourced nowadays to ODMs, such
as Magna, and will eventually go to the Foxconns of this world.

But more importantly, Tesla’s unique advantages in machine learning, and its
lack of exposure to legacy systems (internal combustion tech, unconnected
cars) give it the chance to tap into larger and faster-growing markets ahead
of its competitors. The move from the traditional model without connectivity
and computers will change to one of owned autonomy, shared mobility and,
eventually, to Autopia-on-demand autonomous mobility.

We are seeing a large number of new startups aiming to create new cars,
commercial vehicles and other methods of transportation. Some names include:
[NextEV](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/nextev#/entity), Atieva,
ThunderPower,
[Gogoro](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/gogoro#/entity),
[Navya](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/navya-technology#/entity),
Borgward, [Local Motors](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/local-
motors), [ZMP](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/zmp#/entity), [Faraday
Future](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/faraday-future#/entity),
Starship, [Varden Labs](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/varden-
labs#/entity), [Easy
Mile](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/easymile#/entity), [Auro
Robotics](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/auro-robotics#/entity),
Gaius Automotive, [Elio](https://www.crunchbase.com/product/elio#/entity),
[LeEco](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/letv#/entity),
[nuTonomy](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/nutonomy#/entity), Dyson,
[Mission Motors](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/mission-motors),
Boosted, [Lit Motors](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/lit-motors),
[Renovo Motors](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/renovo-
motors#/entity), Inboard Technology, Future Motion, GLM, [Dubuc
Motors](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/dubuc-motors#/entity), Dagmy
Motors, [Newton Vehicles](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/newton-
vehicles), [ALTe Technologies](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/alte-
technologies#/entity), Lumen Motors, Barham Motors, [Highlands
Power](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/highlands-power-inc#/entity),
[Myers Motors](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/myers-motors#/entity),
Tratus, Virtus Motors, [AC Motors](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/ac-
motors#/entity), Scalar Automotive, Fenix Vehicles, Marfil, Esco Motors,
Lithos Motors. I expect to see hundreds more on the scene in the coming years.

> Don’t be surprised if there are Red Bull-branded cars driving around in the
near future.

Even the most innovative mobility concepts eventually require a vehicle. In
comparison to today’s vehicles, they might have a different form factor, or be
made from different material, be powered differently and controlled in another
way. But someone has to develop, manufacture, sell, maintain and guarantee the
vehicle. Existing automakers still have those competencies and the ability to
adapt over time, if some parameters can change, as described. They have the
knowledge and the processes to turn a profit while still producing such a
complex, long-lasting, safety focused product, and they know how to scale it.
In addition to this, they have an existing brand, reputation and customer
loyalty that will last for a certain time.

The premier brands will, for a certain period, have an advantage. And so do
the fast and cash-laden newcomers. We also will most likely see brands and
companies focusing on certain mobility niches. Many future developments will
be based on still-open questions, such as how new vehicles will be used, how
urban and rural area mobility will be separated, how fast e-vehicles and
autonomous technology will take the lead and be accepted or how regulations
will accelerate or slow down certain development.

Consumers still look for some branding values in the automotive environment.
Companies such as Porsche, as well as other premium brands, benefit from this,
and therefore won’t likely be as affected as other mass-market brands. New and
existing brands will be used for cars, as in the past Fender for the VW
Beetle, Paul Smith for Mini, Gucci with the Fiat 500 and numerous others.
Don’t be surprised if there are Red Bull-branded cars driving around in the
near future.

